149. In the first place, Madam President, let me congratulate you
warmly on behalf of the delegation of the People’s
Republic of Albania on your election as President of the
twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly.

150. During this year, the course of events in the world
arena has been characterized by the continued upsurge of
revolutionary and national liberation movements, by the
heightened struggle of the peaceful and freedom-loving
countries to safeguard their independence and their higher
vital interests. Those interests are being increasingly menaced 
by the policy of intervention and imperialist domination 
followed by the United States of America and the
revisionists of the Soviet Union, which are intensifying their
aggressive activities in accordance with their joint plans to
subject the world to their hegemony. As a result of the
policy of positions of strength pursued by these two great
Powers, a serious international situation has arisen which is
fraught with grave dangers for general peace and security.

151. Today the oppressed peoples and nations are more
than ever aware of their legitimate rights. Their revolt is
taking an increasingly vigorous form. The storm of the
revolutionary struggle for national liberation and social
progress is raging in the four corners of the earth. It is
developing continuously to become an impetuous torrent
which has shaken imperialism, colonialism and international
reaction to their very foundations and which is getting the
main hand, the great and glorious path of history, along
which human society is rapidly advancing. The flames of
the armed struggle for freedom burn ever higher, becoming
stronger and spreading further, engulfing vast regions of the
globe and extending from the Pacific and Indo-China to the
Middle East, to Africa and other areas. The world is
evolving in a direction favourable to the peoples and against
imperialism, its allies and its tools.

152. The successive waves of the peoples’ struggle have
dealt harsh blows to the ringleader of imperialism, the
United States of America, and are speeding its decline.
Following the most shattering defeat it has ever suffered in
its armed aggression against Viet-Nam, and as a result of the
reverses it has experienced throughout the world owing to
its policy of aggression and of oppression of peoples, the
United States of America is becoming more and more
deeply enmeshed in serious economic, financial and political 
crises. Its internal and external contradictions become
daily more flagrant. Its policy of global strategy and of
world rule has received irreparable damage. United States
imperialism has blundered into a blind alley from which
there can be no escape.

153. The revisionist leaders of the Soviet Union are
equally prey to numerous contradictions and insuperable
difficulties, both domestically and internationally, on account 
of their betrayal of Marxist-Leninism and of their
restoration of capitalism in the Soviet Union. Soviet
revisionism has now unmasked itself on the world stage as a
social imperialist Power linked to the United States of
America in a counter-revolutionary “Holy Alliance“ seeking
to rule the world.

154. The peace-loving peoples and countries are becoming
aware that United States-Soviet collusion is the most
serious threat and danger to their common cause, their
sovereign rights and international peace and security, and
that the struggle against such a conspiracy has become an
imperative objective necessity. Indeed, the imperialists of
the United States of America and the Soviet Union are
hated; they are being increasingly fought and isolated by
the peoples. This is their great weakness and will be of
decisive importance in hastening their total collapse.

155. Faced with such a situation, the two great Powers are
multiplying their aggressive efforts and actions; they are
speeding up the arms race and their preparations for war,
intensifying their collaboration and hatching new plots and
conspiracies. Recently, the contacts between them, their
negotiations and dealings both secret and open, which
extend to various fields and affect the vital interests of the
world community, have become still more frequent. In
essence, all these plans and machinations are designed to
counter the struggle for freedom of the oppressed peoples
and nations, to enslave both them and other independent
nations, to exploit the peoples and pillage their wealth, to
establish the world hegemony of the two Powers by
dividing the globe into spheres of influence. This is
confirmed, inter alia, by the agreements and plans of these
two Powers in the field of nuclear weapons, including the
bargaining at present in progress between their Foreign
Ministers with regard to strategic arms; by the many deals,
deceptions and pressures of all kinds in connexion with the
question of Viet-Nam and that of the Middle East; by the
aggression against Czechoslovakia and its military occupation; 
by their haggling over the German question and over
that of West Berlin; by their joint plans to bring Europe and
Asia under their sway and, in particular, by the encirclement 
of the People’s Republic of China and the war being
waged against it and in many other ways.

156. One of the consequences of the great Soviet-American 
counter-revolutionary conspiracy is the armed
aggression of the Yankee imperialists against the people of
Viet-Nam, which has been in progress now for several years.
Despite the barbarous means to which the United States
imperialists have had recourse, despite the continuous
escalation of the war in the south and the most ferocious
bombing raids in the north, the people of Viet-Nam has, by
its heroic struggle, dealt a series of shattering, blows to the
aggressors and has driven them to the wall. It was precisely
on the eve of total United States defeat in Viet-Nam that
the Soviet revisionists made their greatest efforts, as
compensation for the benevolent attitude adopted by the
United States with regard to their aggression in Czechoslovakia, 
to extricate their imperialist United States partners 
from a difficult situation, to save their face and their
imperialist positions and to win for them at the conference
table what they had been unable to obtain on the
battlefield, namely, the capitulation of the people of
Viet-Nam to the Yankee aggressors.

157. But the people of Viet-Nam has never fallen to its
knees. It is well aware of the fact that only by armed
struggle can it win complete victory over the aggressors. It
knows that “peaceful” negotiations, American-style, are
intended to undermine its legitimate struggle for freedom
and to perpetuate the United States occupation of South
Viet-Nam in accordance with aggressive imperialist-revisionist 
plans against the other countries of the region
and, primarily, against the People’s Republic of China.

158. The Albanian people and its Government have been
and always will be at the side of their brothers of Viet-Nam.
We are profoundly convinced that, by resolutely pursuing
its armed struggle to the bitter end, the people of Viet-Nam
will bring about the ignominious failure of these diabolical
plots and will achieve its sacred aspirations.

159. Progressive humanity has unanimously condemned
the perfidious armed aggression of the Soviet revisionists
against Czechoslovakia. Law in Czechoslovakia today is
made by tanks and bayonets. By fire and by sword the
masters are trying to stifle the will of the Czechoslovak
people to reconquer its national dignity, its freedom and its
independence, which were trampled underfoot on 21 August 1968.

160. The events which have occurred during one year of
occupation, and particularly the recent events on the
anniversary of 21 August, have once again demonstrated to
the whole world that neither a reign of terror, nor tanks,
nor a state of siege, nor emergency powers can succeed in
curbing the legitimate resistance and struggle of the
Czechoslovak people. It will never bow to the foreign
invaders and its struggle for freedom will be strengthened
and developed in every possible way and by all possible
means until victory is won.

161. The Albanian people and its Government resolutely
and energetically condemned, from the very first day, the
Fascist-like aggression against Czechoslovakia and formally
denounced the Warsaw Treaty, which has become an
instrument of aggression in the hands of the new imperialist
Soviet Power against the other signatories of the Treaty. We
have always followed with deep sympathy the resistance of
the Czechoslovak people to the odious occupation régime.
The people of Albania are and will remain on the side of
their Czechoslovak brothers in their legitimate struggle
against foreign occupation.

162. The aggression against Czechoslovakia and its military 
occupation, as well as the evolution of relationships
between the Soviet Union and its “allies” in this region,
have revealed that the policy and action of the Soviet
leaders towards these countries are now based on blackmail
and threats of force, the principal weapon being the Warsaw
Treaty. Frequent movements of armed units of Warsaw
Treaty forces or successive manoeuvres by the forces of
that aggressive organization have recently taken place in
those countries. It is clear that all this has been done to
demonstrate the military power of the Soviet revisionists
and to obtain, by the threat of force, obedience or
concessions in favour of their policy of hegemony as well as
to prepare for new adventures against other countries.

163. In their endeavours to find a theoretical foundation
for this policy of hegemony and aggression, the Soviet
revisionist leaders invoke the interest of the “socialist
community”, i.e. their imperialist policy and the slogan of
“limited sovereignty” borrowed from their mentor, 
Mr. John Foster Dulles.

164. The course of events and the well-known facts clearly
demonstrate that the Soviet Government has now embarked 
on a policy of imperialist expansion. Large Soviet
military forces are deployed in the territories of its allies,
particularly along the Romanian frontiers, both on Soviet
territory and on that of Hungary and Bulgaria. In the
Mediterranean, the Soviet fleet is competing with the
United States Sixth Fleet and is playing the same part:
threatening the security and liberty of the independent
countries of that region. It must be stressed that the naval
bases of these two fleets constitute a grave danger both to
the countries in which they are installed and to the other
peace-loving countries of the Mediterranean. We energetically 
denounce the serious threat constituted by these
bases to peace and security in the Mediterranean and in
Europe as a whole.

165. It is clear that the Soviet leaders have already
unsheathed the sword and are preparing for military
adventures. They are plunging ever more deeply into a
policy of aggression and of war. The aggressive actions of
the Soviet leaders follow one another in an unbroken
sequence. This is confirmed, inter alia, by their armed
aggression against Czechoslovakia, their acts of armed
aggression against Czechoslovakia, their acts of armed
provocation and aggression against the People’s Republic of
China and their blackmail and threats of force against
Romania, Yugoslavia, Albania and other countries. One
thing is certain, however: the lot of the aggressor will be
total destruction, such as has always been the fate of
aggressors and military adventurers, as history confirms.

166. As for anyone who has aggressive designs against the
People’s Republic of Albania, we say to those who would
dare to lift their hands against us that the new socialist
Albania is invulnerable and will never be taken by surprise.
The Albanian people, master of its destinies and with a long
tradition of combating any invader, will know how to
answer. It is not alone, and the assistance it will be given
will know no frontiers. Anyone who dares to attack our
socialist fatherland will, as always, fail lamentably.

167. Two years have already elapsed since the imperialist
Israeli aggression against the Arab countries, and the
resulting tragic and: unbearable situation in that region
remains unaltered. The chief responsibility for that monstrous 
crime against the Arab peoples rests with the United
States of America and with the revisionist leaders of the
Soviet Union. With odious cynicism, these two imperialist
Powers are vying with each other in extracting every
possible advantage from this situation so as to assure for
themselves dominating positions in the oil-rich and strategically 
important Middle East, and to gain the maximum
profit at the expense of the Arab peoples. Meanwhile, the
Israeli aggressors, emboldened by this situation, continue to
apply their aggressive and expansionist policy in the
occupied territories and against the neighbouring Arab
lands. Their aggressive actions persist; they are constantly
launching attacks and acts of armed provocation against the
United Arab Republic, Jordan, Syria and the Lebanon. The
Arab peoples in the territories occupied by the Zionist
aggressors still live under a reign of terror.

168. The Arab peoples are becoming increasingly aware of
the fact that the two great Powers are opposed to a just
solution of the Middle East problem. While the United
States of America openly supports Israel, continually
provides it with arms and uses it as a tool for the realization
of its plans against the Arab peoples, the Soviet revisionist
leaders are taking advantage of the situation thus created to
carry out their own designs for hegemony, calculating that
the Arab peoples threatened by Israel will have need of
them and will thus be obliged to defer and submit to them.
The objective of both great Powers is to stifle the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people and of the other Arab
peoples, to eliminate the Palestinian problem and to
maintain the tense and tragic situation which has been
created to the detriment of the Arab peoples, in order to
secure a position of dominance for themselves and to
plunder the wealth of the countries of that region. The
same objectives are served by United Nations resolutions,
such as that of 22 November 1967 [resolution
242 (1967)], a product of the plot between the United
States and Soviet Governments, or the other plans which
they have been evolving in the course of bipartite,
quadripartite and other negotiations in the United Nations
or in the corridors of the Foreign Ministries.

169. The old and new imperialists and the Zionists
imagine that they can easily impose their criminal plans on
the Arab peoples. They forget with whom they are dealing.
The Arab peoples have never agreed, and will never agree,
to submit to pressure, intrigue or naked force on the part of
oren or concealed aggressors. They are brave and freedom-loving 
peoples, with glorious cultural, warrior and humanitarian 
traditions, dating back many centuries, and they have
illuminated the history of mankind in every field. They
have given to the world since ancient times some most.
eminent writers, historians, philosophers and scientists.
Their universities have been celebrated; they revealed to
Europe the treasures of ancient Greek philosophy.

170. These people who have struggled heroically against
foreign invaders throughout the centuries, will not allow.
themselves to be subdued either by intrigue or by tanks and
aircraft, whether made in the United States or elsewhere.
They are invincible; their power is great and it will
inevitably triumph. Let their foes tremble! The heroic and
glorious struggle of the Palestinian partisans is the best
evidence of this. I wish, from this rostrum, to salute on
behalf of the Albanian people our Palestinian brothers who,
sword in hand, have raised high over the battlefield the
banner of liberty and independence.

171. Imperialism and international Zionism have striven
for decades to introduce Jews from all over the world into
Palestine and to establish there a bridgehead of domination
and aggression. Jews from various Western countries as well
as from the Ukraine, Poland, Romania and elsewhere have
infiltrated into that land. My Palestine brothers, they have
come into your territory, financed by international
Zionism, and, usurping your land, have forced you to live in
tents in the desert. But, as one, you have arisen in a valiant
fight for the recognition of your sacred rights. The
imperialists and the modern revisionists, however, are
applying the rule of silence with regard to your struggles.

172. As a representative of the Albanian people and as
your loyal brother, however, I will raise my voice here, in
the United Nations; I shall speak of your rights and of your
heroic struggle and I shall do so always and incessantly
“though all the world should fall” (hatta ua laou dounya
kharabat). They accuse you of terrorism, of outrages; but
you are a people of great ideals, of noble and pure spirit;
you are warriors who, under the threat of oppression, have
for years been struggling night and day for your freedom,
dignity and honour, for the honour of your women and for
a happy future.

173. Your policy is one of fraternity towards all your
Arab brothers and towards all the progressive peoples of the
world. You have also shown a truly humane attitude
towards the Israelis. But you are not a people with the
spirit of slaves. It is those who oppress you who are slaves
in spirit and — whether today or tomorrow — they will be
defeated by your heroic struggle, an integral part of the
struggle of the Arab peoples. 

174. There are those who claim that Israel is strong. This
is not true. A State which is rapacious, represses other
peoples and drowns them in blood cannot possibly be
strong. The truth is that the alleged strength of Israel stems
above all from the temporary difficulties of the Arab
peoples. No one should deceive himself, however. As for us,
the people of Albania, we are firmly convinced; that the
Arab peoples will rise up in ever-growing strength and will
surely overcome the enemies of their freedom and sovereignty 
to use one of your own expressions, we believe in
this as in the air we breathe.

175. Some might, perhaps, nourish the hope of a political
settlement to this question of life or death for the Arab
peoples — a political settlement through deals between the
United States imperialists and the Soviet revisionists, with
the direct or indirect assistance of Israel and international
Zionism. No settlement will come from that source, but
only from the freedom struggle of the Arab peoples
themselves. The pseudo-mediators and pseudo-defenders are
well aware of this truth and fear such a settling of scores.
Not only, therefore, is it wrong to foster illusions or cherish.
hopes of a so-called peaceful solution, but those Powers
must not even be permitted to continue their dealings
amongst themselves, since the facts show that as long as
such bargaining goes on, the horizon will remain dark. This
is quite understandable, since the aim of United States
imperialism is, above all, to strengthen its position of
domination in the Middle East, Africa and the Mediterranean, 
while the Soviet revisionists — the new imperialists —
are also seeking to reinforce their positions in the same
areas by turning the temporary difficulties of the Arab
peoples to their own advantage.

176. In conclusion, the question of the Middle East can, in
the hands of the two imperialist Powers, serve only as a
kind of currency for use in bargaining amongst themselves
to smooth over their disagreements in various parts of the
world. This should be evident to all. Some recognize it,
others do not. Some think that, under these equivocal
conditions, they can disengage themselves from a situation
which, for various reasons, they find uneasy. That is quite
another question. Nevertheless, we Albanians think and act
frankly, openly expressing our points of view. We are sure
that our friends will never hold it against us if we speak the
truth in all sincerity, because we love them with all our
hearts, and will the more so in times of difficulty; if our
enemies are offended, this in no way disturbs us.

177. The popular partisan struggle is an integral part of
that great fight for the liberation of the peoples which the
occupiers and the enemies of free countries dread so
greatly. The imperialists and revisionists are endeavouring,
through pressure and demagogy, to impede and stifle your
heroic partisan struggle, my Palestinian brothers. You are
fighting a just fight; the ultimate victory will inevitably be
yours.

178. In the perfidious plans of the United States and
Soviet Governments, an important place has been allotted
this year to their co-ordinated designs on Europe and Asia.
The repeated proposal of the Soviet revisionist leaders
concerning “European security” and their proposal for a
“collective security system in Asia” are unquestionably
interconnected. They are the product of joint Soviet-American 
machinations for the suppression of revolutionary 
movements in the countries of Europe and Asia and are
aimed at bringing those countries into submission and
involving them — particularly those of Asia — in the aggressive
adventures of the two Powers on that continent, especially
against the People’s Republic of China. The two great
Powers are seeking to use the peoples as cannon-fodder in
implementing their aggressive plans for world domination.
This is also the purpose of the efforts made by the
President of the United States, in the course of his tour of
Asia, to create a defence system in that continent. Having
learned the lesson of their failure in Viet-Nam and in view
of the crisis and the whole series of grave problems which
have resulted from it, the United States leaders are
attempting to achieve the same objectives — those of their
aggressive policy — by making still greater use of the peoples
of Asia. In other words, this is a great imperialist-revisionist
conspiracy aimed at assuring by means of such military
pacts — in parallel with the aggressive NATO and Warsaw
pacts—the preservation of the status quo in Europe, the
subordination of that continent to the suzerainty of the
two “super-Powers” by dividing it up into spheres of
influence and by transforming it into a secure rear base
from which to undertake a crusade against the revolutionary 
peoples and peace-loving countries of Asia, particularly
in order to implement the Soviet-American plan to encircle
great socialist China, the main obstacle — the insuperable
obstacle—to the realization of their monstrous objectives,
and to launch an aggressive attack against it.

179. The Government of the People’s Republic of Albania
can well understand the preoccupation of some peaceful
countries of Europe concerning the cause of peace and
security in that continent. The facts reveal, however, that
the policies and actions of the two great Powers are
following a course diametrically opposed to the noble
objectives to which all European peoples aspire. We are
happy to know that many countries of Europe have
expressed reservations concerning those perfidious plans,
and that many Asian countries have categorically refused to
become involved in the aggressive policies of the imperialist
Powers and to allow themselves to be caught in the trap of
their military adventures.

180. How is it possible to conceive of the security of
Europe and Asia under the direction of the two Powers,
when it is precisely because of their aggressive policies and
activities, and of their collaboration, that the freedom-loving 
and peaceful peoples of the two continents are living
in a state of insecurity and when, as a result of that
collaboration, bargaining is carried on, plots are hatched
and armed aggression is waged against their freedom,
sovereignty and national independence?

181. How can there be any talk of such security when the
armed forces of those two Powers are actually stationed in
many foreign countries, trampling underfoot their sovereignty 
and independence and constituting a serious danger
to their own safety as well as to international peace and
security; when their war fleets, cruising in the Atlantic, the
Mediterranean and the Pacific, threaten the independence
and security of the peoples in those areas? How can there
be any talk of security in Europe under the guarantee of
those two Powers when, among other things, it is precisely
because of them that a quarter of a century later, the
problems arising from the Second World War have not yet
been settled in that continent; when not only has the
German problem not been solved, but when the Soviet
leaders are making use of it and of the West Berlin problem
as a bargaining counter with the American imperialists and
the West German “revisionists”, to the detriment of the
German Democratic Republic, and of the German people,
the other countries of Europe and the very security of all
the peoples of Europe? No, the peoples of Europe and Asia
will not allow themselves to be deceived; they will not
allow themselves to be cheated by the two imperialist
Powers; they will never allow themselves to fall into the
traps laid for them; they will never agree to leave their
security and their destiny in the hands of the American and
Soviet leaders.

182. It should be noted that the American imperialists and
the Soviet revisionists, in addition to their collaboration at
the expense of the peoples, also have their disagreements;
they quarrel through greed and their desire for hegemony;
this is perfectly understandable and natural when the
imperialist nature of the Soviet-American alliance is borne
in mind. In particular, the United States Government,
taking advantage of the weaknesses of the Soviet leaders
and of their readiness to make concessions, persistently
puts forward ever-growing pretensions. American imperialism 
not only claims the lion’s share but is also trying to
oust its partner and replace it in the very countries which
the latter claims to regard as its reserved areas. This also
accounts for a certain sensational initiative taken in this
respect at the appropriate moment by the United States
Government.

183. It is obvious that in spite of their contradictions,
these two Powers understand one another within the
framework of their global strategy, and can reach agreement 
where it is a question of stifling the struggle of
peoples fighting for their freedom, independence and
self-determination.

184. It is typical that the leaders of the Soviet Union are
now showing more and more zeal in their collaboration and
joint counter-revolutionary actions with the American
imperialists. They are sparing no effort to find new ways of
continuously consolidating the new “Holy Alliance” and
refrain from any action likely to weaken it. Indeed, after
every pseudo “anti-imperialist” gesture made for demagogic
purposes, they hasten to reassure their partners in Washington 
of their loyalty and to give them practical proof of the
real meaning of the noisy. declarations they make for form’s
sake.

185. Terrified at the immense successes and the uninterrupted 
consolidation of great socialist China, particularly
after the historic victory of the great proletarian cultural
revolution which set the seal on the complete failure of the
plots of imperialist-revisionist agents trying to take the
Chinese citadel from within, the Soviet leaders have gone
over to overt and sanguinary attacks against the Chinese
people.

186. During this period, they have distinguished themselves 
in particular by their aggressive actions against the
People’s Republic of China, accompanied by an unbridled
campaign of anti-Chinese calumnies. The attention of world
public opinion has been particularly drawn to the successive
incidents they have provoked on the Chinese-Soviet frontier, 
particularly through acts of armed provocation on the
Ussuti river and in the Chinese territory of Sinkiang. The
Soviet Union has also concentrated enormous forces in the
Far East, near the Chinese frontier, and has become deeply
engaged in a policy of aggression and preparation for war
against China. The Soviet leaders thus stand revealed as
rabid partners of United States imperialism in the 
anti-Chinese alliance.

187. For their part the American imperialists, along with
their feverish attempts to implement the two Powers’ joint
plan to encircle and wage war against China, excel
themselves in instigating their Kremlin partners to commit
themselves ever more deeply to that military adventure, just
as the Western imperialists did on the eve of the Second
World War, striving to launch Hitler’s Nazis into war against
the Soviet Union. The Soviet leaders show similar tendencies 
with regard to the United States of America, and both
partners fear great socialist China.

188. Peaceful countries and international public opinion
are following with close attention the evolution of this
dangerous situation, which is a grave threat to peace and
security in Asia and in the world.

189. Whatever the plans, the intrigues and the deals, the
acts of provocation and of aggression which may be
contrived and undertaken by the United States imperialists
and the Soviet socio-imperialists, they cannot succeed in
intimidating the peoples; they will never be able to mislead
them as to their true designs as rabid enemies of the peoples
and of international security. For its part, great socialist
China is little concerned by the hysterical outbursts and
aggressive actions of the American imperialists and Soviet
revisionists. There is no force in the world which can bring
the Chinese colossus to its knees. China, with its population
of 700 million, is stronger today than ever before, and if
the imperialists and the Soviet revisionists dare to undertake 
any act of aggression against China, they will receive
the answer they deserve, and that will be the end of them.

190. The struggle of the peoples against imperialism,
colonialism and neo-colonialism has entered a new phase. It
is becoming ever more powerful and better organized.
Workers’ strikes and revolts by young people and progressive 
students in support of rights are breaking out everywhere 
in Europe, Asia and the Americas. The peoples still
groaning under the colonial yoke are intensifying their
resolute armed struggle to deliver themselves once and for
all from the chains of slavery. The people of Viet-Nam, the
people of Czechoslovakia, the people of Palestine and of
the other Arab countries, victims of Israeli imperialist
aggression, the people of Oman, the people of Laos and of a
number of Indo-Chinese countries, those of Angola,
Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau), South Africa, Namibia,
Southern Rhodesia, Puerto Rico and all the other peoples
suffering from imperialist, colonialist and racist oppression
are waging a great struggle; in every continent and in all
parts of the world, they are dealing furious blows against
the old and new imperialists, their colonialist allies and
agents. The ground is giving way beneath the feet of
imperialism.

191. It would be superfluous to stress here the responsibility 
resting upon the United Nations in the face of the
situation at present prevailing in the world arena and of the
major problems of concern to the peoples of the whole 
world. Indeed, as a consequence of the pernicious influence
exercised on it by the United States of America and its
chief collaborators, the present leaders of the Soviet Union,
not only is the United Nations incapable of actively
fulfilling its mission, but is at the same time being
transformed into an instrument of the two Powers’ policy
of aggression and pursuit of hegemony.

192. Far from helping to settle the major problems of our
time, which affect the legitimate rights and higher interests
of the peoples, the United Nations is acting in a manner
flagrantly opposed to the fundamental purposes and principles 
of the Charter. It has profoundly disappointed the
peoples struggling for their freedom and independence, who
have now lost all confidence and have come to the
conclusion that no good can be expected from the United
Nations as long as it is manipulated by the United States
and is subserving American-Soviet plots and collaboration.

193. Many Member States are seriously concerned over
the deplorable situation which has grown up within this
Organization, and at the grave harm done to its prestige and
authority in the eyes of the peoples. There is no doubt that
the first task to be undertaken is the urgent restoration of
the legitimate tights of the People’s Republic of China in
the United Nations and its organs. The immediate elimination 
of the unprecedented anomaly whereby the seat of
the great Chinese nation in this Organization is usurped by
the remnants of a venal clique, representing nothing, is a
categorical imperative. The restoration of China’s rights is
not only a vital reparation for the most flagrant and
shameful violation of the Charter and of the elementary
rules of international law, it is also in keeping with the
urgent need of this Organization to have in its ranks great
socialist China, which represents one quarter of mankind
and without whose membership, as must be obvious to all,
none of the great international problems can be solved. It is
well known that it is not China which needs the United
Nations, but rather the United Nations which needs China.

194. We do not deem it necessary to speak on this
occasion of the hostile and imperialistic designs with regard
to the Chinese people which have prompted the United
States of America to impose its will upon a number of
Member States in order to deny the legitimate rights of
China in this Organization. In addition to the fact that this
is well known, we shall have the opportunity to speak on it
at length as well as on other aspects of the question, when
it comes up for discussion in the General Assembly. We
would, however, wish to stress at this point that a decision
to restore the rights of the People’s Republic of China in
the United Nations would mark an important advance in
the direction of ending the manipulation of the United
Nations by the United States and would encourage new
steps in the same direction.

195. China is a founding Member of the United Nations
and a permanent member of the Security Council. The
Government of the People’s Republic of China is unquestionably 
the sole legitimate representative of the great
Chinese people; it and it alone is entitled to enjoy the
legitimate rights of China in this Organization.

196. We would express the hope that those peaceful
Member States which cherish the fundamental principles of
the Charter and are aware of the immense role of the great
land of China in the world will have the courage to take a
stand in favour of the request made by 14 countries,
including Albania, that the rights of the People’s Republic
of China in the United Nations and in all its organs be
restored, and that the Chiang-Kai-shek clique be immediately 
expelled from this Organization [see A/7652].

197. The Albanian delegation deems it necessary to stress
once again that, in its view, Member States which are
seriously interested in respecting the principle of the
sovereign equality of States, non-intervention in domestic
affairs, observance of the territorial integrity of other States
and respect for the rights of peoples to self-determination
cannot fail to dissociate themselves from the two great
Powers in their treacherous and aggressive plans, which are
dictated by the aims of their imperialist policy of dividing
the world into spheres of influence and thus dominating it. 
The urgent task of such States is, in our view, to oppose
those two Powers and their collusion at the expense of the
cause of peace-loving peoples and countries, and to combat
their dangerous plans to place various peoples and countries
under their tutelage, whatever form such plans may take.
American-Soviet collusion is today the greatest danger to
international peace and security. It is the primary duty of
peace-loving Members of the United Nations, therefore, to
concert their efforts here to oppose the diktat of the two
Powers and their conspiracy to control this Organization.

198. The work of this session of the General Assembly
coincides with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the liberation
of Albania, which the Albanian people will celebrate on 29
November next. Ideals which inspired and guided the
revolutionary struggle of the Albanian people for their
freedom against the Fascist invaders, as well as the
principles upon which the new socialist State was built and
developed after that victory, form the basis of the foreign
policy of the People’s Republic of Albania.

199. Just as during the course of its struggle for freedom,
the Albanian people, still firmly united around its workers'
party, headed by its beloved Comrade Enver Hoxha, and
relying unshakably upon its own resources, has, in the past
quarter of a century, achieved such success in building the
new socialist life, despite numerous difficulties, some
natural and some created by its enemies, that it has
radically changed the face of our country. Once a backward
agricultural country, Albania has now become a country
whose agriculture is being modernized and mechanized and
whose industry is advanced. Albania’s industrial production
is today some 52 times higher than in 1938, the last pre-war
year. In other words, our industry now produces in one
week what was produced in a year in the pre-war period.

200. In socialist Albania, the exploitation of man by man
has been eliminated once and for all. The material and
cultural standard of living is incomparably better than in
the past. The national income is 7 and a half times greater than
before. Nowadays, not only has illiteracy been completely
eliminated, but education and culture have become the
property of the masses of the people; one person in four
attends school and the number of students receiving higher
education is 25 times higher than in 1938.

201. The tremendous achievements in all fields, obtained
in a relatively short period, provide striking evidence of the
supremacy and vitality of our social system. They are a
guarantee of further victories and of a happy future.

202. Guided by the profound aspirations of the Albanian
people, our Government has followed an independent and
revolutionary foreign policy which is fully in keeping with
the defence of our independence, our sovereignty and the
inviolability of our fatherland and of our socialist victories,
as well as with the great cause of peoples and countries
struggling for their freedom, independence and self-determination, 
in order to ensure genuine international co-operation.

203. The People’s Republic of Albania has pursued and 
will continue to pursue its policy of friendship and fraternal
co-operation, on the basis of the principles of Marxist-Leninism, 
with the peoples of the socialist countries; its
policy of friendship for and solidarity with the peoples of
countries struggling for their freedom, democracy and
progress and, in particular, with its brothers the Arab
peoples, the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America and
with all anti-imperialist forces.

204. A close and fraternal friendship, inspired by common
ideals, links the Albanian people with the great people of
China. Albanian-Chinese friendship, forged by the two
heroic parties, is indestructible, since it is built on immortal
foundations. It provides a striking example of relations
between socialist countries, a lively demonstration of the
strength and vitality of genuine socialist relationships,
which know no obstacle and will triumph over every enemy.

205. The Albanian Government has constantly followed
its policy of good-neighbourliness and of normal relations
between States having different social systems, on the basis
of the principles of sovereign equality, non-interference,
respect for independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity 
and co-operation based on mutual advantage.

206. The People’s Republic of Albania has become a
factor for peace and progress in the Balkans and the
Adriatic. It plays an active part in and is making a
constructive contribution to the cause of peace and security
in Europe and in the world. Thanks to this policy, the
People’s Republic of Albania enjoys today the sympathy,
respect and support of all progressive and peace-loving
countries. The Albanian people is fully aware of all this and
of the obligations incumbent upon it in this respect. As
always, it will fulfill its obligations with determination.

207. The People’s Republic of Albania will continue to
co-operate, as in the past, with the peaceful countries which
are Members of the United Nations; alongside with those
countries, it will not fail to make its modest contribution to
the struggle against the imperialist policy of aggression and
of oppression of peoples.

208. We should like to take this opportunity to say here
how much we appreciate the spirit of co-operation that a
great number of Member States have shown us with respect
to many important international problems, thus proving
that we have many common interests. We should also like
to express our gratitude to all friendly countries and
peoples for their sympathy and solidarity with, and sincere
support for, our people in the various situations which have
arisen over the last 25 years. Their friendship and solidarity
have been and will continue to be precious to our people;
they constitute and continue to constitute important
factors in our achievements and successes, in all the
victories of the People’s Republic of Albania, which thus
offers a historic and living example of the extent to which
peoples, whether great or small, are powerful, of the extent
of their possibilities when they are unshakably resolute in
their struggle for freedom, independence and progress.