78. Madam President, allow 
me to congratulate you on your election as our President.
In the exercise of the functions of your high office you will
be able to draw on the extensive and valuable experience
which you have gained through your many years of service
to the United Nations, I assure you of my delegation’s full
co-operation.

79. Preceding speakers in this debate have not failed to
point out that if we contemplate the international picture
of today there is much reason for concern. War and
hostilities, with their inescapable consequences of human
suffering and destruction, are raging in South-East Asia, in
the Middle East and in West Africa. Internal turmoil has
visited many countries. Oppression and violations of human
rights and liberties occur in many parts of the world.
Poverty and even hunger are the order of the day in a world
of larger than ever resources; and let us not forget that the
reality behind this general description is the suffering and
want of the individual, of the family, of the group.

80. The conflict in Nigeria is continuing unabated. We are
faced with a tragedy of incomprehensible dimensions.
Famine and deficiency diseases are taking a heavy toll
among innocent people and even children. Although the
sufferings of the civilian population have assumed alarming
proportions, it has not been possible, despite the most
strenuous efforts, to establish a permanent arrangement
with regard to the humanitarian relief work.

81. As in the past, Denmark is making every possible
effort to assist in the aid programmes for the distressed
civilians in the afflicted areas on either side of the front
line. We continue to direct our attention and our efforts
towards the humanitarian problems. The Danish people,
deeply moved by the sufferings of their fellow beings in
Nigeria, have followed with undiminished and profound
sympathy the plight of the victims of the conflict in that
country. As a result voluntary contributions to the relief
work continue to be forthcoming on an unprecedented scale.

82. My Government has often addressed itself to the
imperative need for all those involved in the conflict to
co-operate fully and actively with the international organizations 
which are engaged in the relief effort. I take this
opportunity of renewing our appeal to all concerned to
ensure such co-operation.

83. We have followed with close interest the efforts
carried out through the Organization of African Unity with
a view to solving the Nigerian conflict. We acknowledge
that this organization is especially qualified to help to
provide a basis for a negotiated solution. Consequently, we
shall continue to give our full support to mediation efforts
through the Organization of African Unity and other
channels particularly well suited for bringing about contact
and negotiation between the parties. By the same token I
must repeat that, in our view, an arms embargo might have
assisted these efforts and we find it most regrettable that
outside countries have not refrained from supplying weapons.

84. In Europe during the past year no real progress has
been seen towards finding a solution to crucial political
problems. None of us have forgotten the serious events in
Czechoslovakia immediately before the last session of the
General Assembly and subsequent events have occupied our
minds. Notwithstanding the impact of these events on
conditions for a détente in Europe, the only way of
obtaining a true détente is to continue the dialogue
between East and West. My country will therefore pursue a
policy designed to bring about meaningful discussions
between East and West — at bilateral or multilateral levels
— on subjects which appear to be ripe for solution.

85. The ideal of convening a conference to discuss
European security problems is still attracting considerable
attention in the international debate. Denmark supports
this idea as one of the appropriate methods of promoting
détente and co-operation. It is essential that the United
States and Canada should take part in the work from the
very beginning and it is equally essential that the preparations 
should reveal that such a conference or conferences
would have reasonable prospects of achieving results in the
areas selected for discussion.

86. After some years of regrettable stalemate in European
integration, there is again some auspicious movement. The
Foreign Minister of France, Mr. Maurice Schumann, when
addressing this Assembly last week, said about the Common
Market:

“There are numerous applications for associate and
even full membership, and it is not only conceivable but
eminently desirable that they may succeed.” [1763rd
meeting, para. 56.]

87. My country has consistently supported efforts taken
towards European integration as a matter of high priority in
our foreign policy. It remains the wish of Denmark to
obtain full membership in the Common Market together
with other countries which have applied for such membership 
and we shall continue to direct our efforts towards
that goal. Together with other Nordic countries, we are at
present examining the possibilities of an extended Nordic
economic co-operation, not as an alternative to our basic
goal — membership of the Common Market — but as a means
of improving the conditions under which Nordic countries
may participate in the building of Europe.

88. The situation in the Middle East continues to be a
cause for concern. There has been no progress made
towards a political solution, and military actions and
counteractions as well as acts of violence within and outside
the area are causing death and destruction and are a
constant source of tension. In order to promote constructive 
developments it is essential that this vicious circle of
violence is broken, and all the parties to the conflict should
therefore direct their urgent attention to this end.

89. We deeply regret that a political solution on the basis
of the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
[242 (1967)] has not yet been achieved. It is the duty of
all parties to the conflict to co-operate actively and in good
faith with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, 
Ambassador Jarring, in the performance of his task
under the resolution. In this context we welcome the
consultation between permanent members of the Security
Council undertaken with a view to strengthening Mr. Jarring’s-hand.

90. Turning to the humanitarian aspects of the situation in
the Middle East, I should like to stress that my country
considers it highly important that international human
solidarity be translated into practical and humanitarian
action. Denmark has, therefore, over the years rendered
substantial and increasing contributions to the activities of
UNRWA, with special emphasis on the Agency’s educational 
and training programmes.

91. When last year the United States decided to discontinue 
all bombings of North Viet-Nam the Danish Government 
stated that a decisive step had been taken towards
transferring the conflict in Viet-Nam from the battlefield to
the negotiating table. Like everybody else, we were, of
course, most gratified when subsequently the talks now
going on in Paris were initiated. We agree with the 
Secretary-General that, although these talks have not
produced any conclusive results so far, the very fact that all
the parties involved in the conflict are engaged in these
discussions is a most important step in the right direction.
We remain convinced that only through negotiation can a
settlement be brought about.

92. The Government of the United States recently
announced its decision to carry out certain troop withdrawals 
from Viet-Nam. In our opinion, measures of this
kind reflect the right trend. It is our fervent hope that the
parties involved will show flexibility and make the necessary 
concessions that will give the severely afflicted
Viet-Namese people hope for a future in peace.

93. When hostilities cease, concerted and large-scale
efforts must be made to relieve the distress of the civilian
population and to rebuild Viet-Nam. As already mentioned
by my Swedish colleague [1757th meeting], the Nordic
countries are conducting investigations concerning what
part they can play in such endeavours.

94. As for the situation in southern Africa, it is deeply
regrettable that the General Assembly is again convening
without a solution having been found to the problems
emanating from the racial and colonial policies pursued by
the Governments in power in that part of the world. My
country’s position with regard to the policy of apartheid of
the Government of South Africa, to the policy of that
Government vis-a-vis the former Mandated Territory of
Namibia, to the illegal régime in Salisbury and to the
colonial policies of Portugal remains unchanged. We are
deeply concerned about the reprehensible policy of
apartheid not only because of the political dangers involved
but also because of the fundamental moral issue. We
continue to insist that the colonial problems I have
mentioned should be solved through strict application of
the principle of self-determination, thus honouring the
inalienable right of the peoples of those Territories to shape
their own national destiny.

95. In this connexion I would suggest that developments
during the past year strongly indicate that if the international 
community as organized in the United Nations is
to exert any real influence on these various problems it
must be through concerted action based on meaningful
support from the membership.

96. My country has scrupulously endeavoured to observe
and implement the mandatory measures adopted by the
Security Council with respect to Southern Rhodesia and
the arms embargo called for by the Security Council in
relation to South Africa. We shall certainly go on doing so,
not only because of our moral and legal obligations in the
questions at issue but also because, looking at the matter in
a wider perspective, the very United Nations system of
peaceful enforcement might be at stake. It is deplorable
that a few countries have failed to honour their commitments 
in those respects under the Charter.

97. The problems related to disarmament are global; they
are at the same time of a highly complicated technical
nature. If, therefore, the consideration of these problems is
to be meaningful there must be a combination of involvement 
of the entire international community with discussion
in a more limited and technically highly qualified and well
equipped forum. With the annual deliberations in this
General Assembly and the continuous efforts of the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva,
we thus have the necessary international institutional
framework. We share the opinion expressed by the Secretary-General 
that it is of the highest importance that all five
nuclear Powers are associated with the negotiations for
disarmament. Meanwhile we welcome the enlargement of
the Conference in Geneva. We are confident that it will not
only benefit the work of the Conference but also serve to
strengthen the ties to the world Organization.

98. Admittedly, tangible results have not so far been
achieved in the disarmament field since the twenty-third
session of the General Assembly. It is true that since then a
number of States have ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. 
However, as long as the Treaty has not been
signed and ratified by the principal nuclear-weapon Powers
and by other States with a potential nuclear capability, it
cannot fulfil its purpose. Moreover, it is to be feared that a
further delay in the entry into force of the Treaty would
entail the risk that the efforts to halt the proliferation of
nuclear weapons would prove futile because of the rapid
technological development. The Government of Denmark
therefore hopes that the Powers which, by virtue of their
international position and importance, have a special
responsibility in these matters will accede to the Treaty
without further delay.

99. It is gratifying that contact has been resumed between
the two great nuclear Powers on the opening of negotiations 
for the limitation of offensive and defensive nuclear
weapon systems. It is of crucial importance for further
progress in the disarmament field in general that the
negotiations should get under way as soon as possible and
that they should produce results within a foreseeable
future. Failing that, there is a danger of an acceleration of
the arms race with all its possible implications for 
international stability.

100. It is still too early to say whether the intensive
negotiations in Geneva on concrete disarmament measures
will lead to results. But the negotiations have reflected a
genuine will to move ahead on the path to disarmament.
The Danish Government therefore trusts that it will prove
possible for the Conference to submit to this Assembly a
draft treaty on the demilitarization of the sea-bed and to
suggest practicable solutions concerning a complete test-ban
treaty and to the prohibition of the development, stockpiling 
and use of bacteriological and chemical weapons in warfare.

101. With regard to the question of the representation of
China, it remains the position of the Danish Government
that only the People’s Republic of China is entitled to
represent China in the United Nations.

102. Now I should like to make a few observations of a
general nature on economic development and the activities
of the United Nations in this area. One of the most
important tasks for the United Nations is to secure the
success of the Second United Nations Development Decade.
To achieve this, it is necessary to establish an effective
co-ordination of all efforts. While the principal responsibility 
for promoting economic development clearly lies
with the developing countries themselves, the industrialized
world must give its full support to the concept of concerted
action underlying an international strategy for development.

103. It is important that there should be clearly defined
areas of action for the organizations involved, in particular
the United Nations itself, the World Bank Group, the
United Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Their
contributions should be included in specified programmes
of action taking into account the commitments which the
industrialized countries have already accepted in these
organizations.

104. While planning for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, we should in no way reduce the pace
of the efforts in which we are already engaged. I think, in
particular, of the system of general preferences in favour of
the developing countries. Denmark, in close co-operation
with the other Nordic countries, has taken an active part in
the deliberations within the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development on shaping the main features 
of such a system of preferences. The preference
scheme would be valuable in bringing the trade in manufactured 
goods from the developing countries in an effective
and orderly manner into the present system of world trade.
My Government hopes that the negotiations ahead, though
undoubtedly difficult, will meet with success.

105. The important factor is, in our view, that the
planning for the Second Development Decade is carried out
in a spirit of partnership between the developed and the
developing countries and not in a spirit of confrontation.
The Danish Government is prepared, through the execution
of its long-term plans for co-operation with the developing
countries, to assist in making this process one of real
benefit to those countries.

106. I now turn to the, problems of the human environment. 
The very name implies that this is a problem of
common concern to us all, in North and South, East and
West; it is a problem which should therefore be tackled
through a joint effort of all nations. Quite clearly, this is
one of the basic ideas behind and expressed in the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council and in the report presented
by the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social
Council in the summer of 1969. The problem is urgent in
two ways. For the so-called highly developed countries it is
essential that the present dangerous trend should be halted
and reversed before we reach the point of no return; for
other countries it is equally essential that they should start
now to prevent their falling victim to similar mistakes and
that they should instead take advantage of the costly lesson
hopefully learned by the developed countries. As an
appropriate incentive to these endeavours, all countries
should keep in mind the words of the Secretary-General
that if current trends continue the future of life on earth
could be endangered.

107. We therefore consider that the initiative taken by the
Government of Sweden in this matter and the invitation to
hold the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment in Stockholm should be highly appreciated.
The Government of Denmark intends, within its resources,
to engage fully in the future international endeavours in
this matter and we shall contemplate what we might be able
to offer in the fields of research and experimentation.

108. The subject of United Nations peace-keeping operations 
is another important question facing our Organization. 
It was a hopeful sign when the twenty-third session of
the General Assembly decided [resolution 2451 (XXIII)]
to entrust the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations 
with the task of preparing a comprehensive report on
United Nations military observers established or authorized
by the Security Council for observation purposes pursuant
to Council resolutions. Admittedly, the formulation of this
mandate reflected rather a restricted conception of the
United Nations peace-keeping activities but we consider it a
first step in the right direction and, as such, a satisfactory
development. Though much useful work has been accomplished 
and some progress achieved during the deliberations
in the Special Committee, we cannot but feel some
disappointment that it has not as yet proved possible to
obtain comprehensive agreement about a full report on
military observers as called for in the resolution.

109. Considering the historical background of this specific
field of United Nations activities, I certainly do not wish to
minimize the difficulties involved in building a comprehensive 
framework for United Nations peace-keeping activities;
nor shall I overlook the legitimate interests involved on all
sides. However, the Danish Government is of the opinion
that, while taking these basic observations into consideration, 
we must press on for constructive achievements.

110. It is with satisfaction that we have learnt that
consultations are taking place among members of the
Special Committee concerning the character of a model on
United Nations operations involving military contingents.

111. Recently, incidents involving the hijacking of planes
and their diversion to unauthorized destinations have
attracted considerable attention and provoked justified
alarm and condemnation. Such irresponsible and criminal
acts present incalculable risks to international air traffic in
general, and to innocent passengers and crew members of
hijacked planes in particular. Urgent steps should therefore
be taken in an appropriate international context with a
view to preventing further acts of this kind.

112. I should like to make a few concluding remarks on a
specific subject of common interest. I refer to the observations 
made by the Secretary-General in the introduction
to his annual report [A/7601/Add.1] concerning his
informal and confidential activity, sometimes covered by
the broad term “good offices”. I think that these observations 
by the Secretary-General were both timely and pertinent. 
Of course, he has a political role to play within
the framework and in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter. If governments ask the Secretary-General for help
in dealing with delicate problems that face them the
Secretary-General is competent under the Charter to
comply with such requests — and I would perhaps even go so
far as to say duty - bound to do so.

113. I wish to take this opportunity of assuring the
present holder of the high office, U Thant, of our full
confidence in him and our deep respect for the way in
which he discharges his many heavy responsibilities.