1. One source of satisfaction afforded me by
this session of the General Assembly, Madam President, is
the significant fact of your election to preside over it. That
fact is extremely encouraging for countries like my own
that have struggled for many years, especially during the
constructive phase of our present constitutional Government,
to give the status of women its proper attributes. We
therefore celebrate as a victory of our own, in close
harmony with our beliefs, the fact that an illustrious
representative of the loftiest ideals of human justice and
talent has been unanimously elected by all Member States
represented here.

2. Under your enlightened guidance, the General
Assembly is embarking upon one of its most promising
sessions, at a time when the agenda before us includes items
of the utmost gravity and importance.

3. The supreme position you now occupy at the twenty-fourth
session reminds us of the notable presidence of
another eminent figure, Mrs. Vijaya Laksmi Pandit, who
conducted the eighth session of the General Assembly with
the same ability that we look for from you in view of your
acknowledged experience and understanding of the problems
which are a source of concern and disquiet to all
nations.

4. Despite our concern, it is encouraging to find that at
times such as these, when international organizations are
suffering the consequences of the unrest afflicting the
whole of mankind, a distinguished woman should have been
chosen to preside over the highest organ of the United
Nations.

5. At the last session of the Assembly this same honour
fell to Mr. Emilio Arenales, an eminent Latin American,
now deceased, to whose memory I should like to pay a
posthumous tribute for the wisdom with which he guided
our activities on that occasion, and for the admirable and
unflinching courage with which he faced adversity in the
difficult tasks he accomplished.

6. May I assure you, Madam President, that, in the
fulfilment of our duties and responsibilities, the work lying
ahead of us will be lightened by the resolution and
influence you bring to bear in searching for the most
desirable and appropriate solutions.

7. My country has followed with keen interest the
emergence of that group of young nations that has come to
be called the third world. As a token of the constructive
concern that prompts us, I welcome you to this General
Assembly and congratulate you in the name of my
Government and of its supreme leader and President,
Dr. Joaquin Balaguer.

8. As I see it, the primary cause of the international
political crisis which resembles a chronic disease to which
all States Members of the United Nations are liable to fall
prey, is lack of compliance with international treaties. This
evil is all the more prejudicial to the objectives pursued by
the Organization in that neither the principles of the
Charter nor the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly, nor even the Security Council, which is directly
entrusted with the tremendous responsibility of maintaining 
peace throughout the world, have escaped its influence.

9. Hence we doubt whether, in the midst of such a crisis,
we should advocate the admission of mainland China as a
Member of the United Nations, when it is precisely that
country which has done most to flout the principles
designed to prevent the scourge of war and to ensure the
maintenance of peace throughout the world, principles that
are not merely legal rules of conduct but inviolable
imperatives for all Members of the Organization.

10. The Dominican Republic also doubts the desirability
of admitting to this Organization a new Member which
neither believes in nor abides by the postulates of the
Charter by which Member States are governed. It would be
naive to expect that countries which become Members of
the United Nations will be able to change the very structure
of their policy, which has resisted all change for so many
years. These considerations justify the position assumed
now and in the past by my country in speaking out at the
General Assembly against the persistent candidature of
mainland China.

11. Nevertheless, we recognize the high ideals which
generally inspire and endeavour to preserve peace. We refer
to my country’s refusal to accept any kind of intervention
by States in the internal affairs of other States. In view of
the events that have been occurring in different parts of the
world in circumstances involving States Members of the
United Nations, it is vitally necessary at this time that, far
from allowing those principles which safeguard the 
self-determination of peoples to be weakened, we should see to
it that a collective reaction takes place to ensure that those
principles become more than mere legal pronouncements.

12. The events in Czechoslovakia were a source of grave
concern to the countries of the free world. Despite the
regrettable train of events that followed, which has now
culminated in an internal situation that is reluctantly
accepted, we must make our position clear as regards a
curious belief that has recently emerged. I refer to the claim
by one Power of the right to intervene in the affairs of
another Power solely on the grounds of their association in
a political pact, or the use of power to freeze the ideologies
shared by such countries into hard-and-fast dogmas.

13. It is incomprehensible that, while the United Nations
is striving to further mutual respect among nations, these
events should reveal a tendency to undermine those very
objectives. We do not progress by going backwards; yet this
is what seems to be happening with the doctrine which we
might call the doctrine of “protected sovereignties”. We are
all aware that the ambitious concept of guaranteed constitutions
has been mooted for many years. It has been said
that one State can guarantee the political constitution of
another.

14. That interpretation has naturally been refuted on the
grounds that it is doubtful whether a sovereign is legitimately
entitled to transfer jurisdiction over the constitution;
it is certainly undemonstrable, since a people’s right to
self-determination is inalienable, cannot be held in disregard
or made the subject of international agreements. If any
benefit has been derived from these events, it is undoubtedly 
that all freedom-loving peoples in the world have
been given an opportunity to reaffirm their faith in and
acceptance of the principles which are now universal.

15. My country has not been indifferent to the secessionist 
war in Nigeria, which has cost so many lives because
of the impossibility of going to the assistance of the
defenceless civilian population, and which has given the
civilized world such a picture of untold horror and tragedy
in that part of Africa.

16. My Government considers that, in view of this
situation, we must devise means of restoring peace in the
zone of hostilities and of putting an end to the tragedy that
has been going on there for so long, without infringing the
right of non-intervention.

17. If we are to trust the information available to us, more
than ninety aircraft have been hijacked in mid-flight by
force of arms, to the danger of the aircraft, the crew and
the passengers.

18. The information at our disposal indicates that these
acts were committed for political motives. If we are right in
thinking this, it may reasonably be expected that these acts
will degenerate into even more serious offences in future. In
any situation in which this criminal irregularity is likely to
take place, there is undoubtedly a danger that, because of
their implications, the repetition of such acts could in
certain circumstances disturb the peace which the United
Nations is called upon to preserve. The United Nations is
therefore justified in taking up the problem in due course
and dealing with it in the appropriate way.

19. The hijacking of aircraft in different parts of the world
should lead us to consider the creation of a favourable
climate of opinion for the treatment of this type of
depredation as an international crime similar to piracy on
the high seas.

20. Views have been voiced which, although obviously
well-intentioned, are apt to create confusion. We refer to
the reaction aroused by the possibility that sparsely
populated territories that have become sovereign and
independent States will be admitted to the United Nations.
The reasons advanced for not admitting these States have
political overtones. It is argued, moreover, that, because the
States in question have small populations and would have
difficulty in becoming self-sufficient, they would not be
able to meet the contribution required of them to maintain
their rights as Members of the United Nations.

21. We dislike the fact that the exercise of a right
involving the idea of peace should be conditioned by any
kind of budgetary consideration. Nor do we like any kind
of discrimination in the application of the concept of the
sovereignty and independence of States.

22. We realize that these criteria afford protection for
small countries such as the Dominican Republic. We also
realize that for countries which cannot protect themselves
in other ways, recognition of their rights is a substitute for
all the other kinds of protective and defensive measures
which other States have the privilege of enjoying.

23. As we object to all forms of discrimination, we
maintain our inflexible attitude with regard to the policy of
apartheid and shall continue to uphold and strengthen the
principle adopted by the General Assembly in this unhappy
conflict, which seems to be no nearer its end and holds out
no hope that South Africa will recognize the impressive
nature of one of the most laudable advances made by
modern civilization.

24. The efforts made this year to find an honourable
settlement in Viet-Nam through the continuation of the
Paris talks have been hopefully welcomed by my Government, 
whose attitude is, I am sure, echoed by most of the
Dominican people. Certain groups in different parts of the
world have shown impatience with the slowness and
nuances of this personal meeting between the parties
concerned.

25. We believe that the talks should continue as long as
possible and that South Viet-Nam and its associates have
indicated quite clearly that they are prepared to cease
hostilities and reach a constructive agreement. The withdrawal 
of troops from Viet-Namese territory and. their
return to the United States, as also the categorical
statements made here on the 18th of this month 
[1755th meeting] by the highest and most qualified spokesman of
the United States Government, are a further manifestation
of the desire for peace by which that Power is animated. We
must remember, however, that there is a long road still to
travel and that a tithe of the sacrifice, which may be of vast
proportions, has yet to be paid. My country expresses the
heartfelt hope that a way of bringing the situation in
Viet-Nam to an end will be found in the not too distant
future.

26. The conflict in the Middle East still engages the
attention of all peace-loving countries. Efforts have 
admittedly been made to put an end to the situation, which at
times has been explosive—as it is at present. Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967
should be sufficient to enable the parties to enter upon the
final phase of the conflict.

27. We have frequently heard it said that this is an isolated
situation confined to a certain area, but we would point out
that at the present time there are many tensions in the
world and that peace is exposed to such grave threats in this
era of atomic and nuclear weapons that it is impossible to
be sure that an isolated situation will not lead to an
extension of the conflict.

28. My Government is convinced that it was a wise step to
include the question of international co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space, which gave rise to General
Assembly resolution 2453 (XXI) of 20 December 1968
in our agenda.

29. The speed with which research and conquest of outer
space is proceeding compels us to press forward despite the
obstacles that may be placed in the way of studies and
decisions relating to the legal régime that must be established 
before a situation arises which entails orderly
regulation agreed upon at the international level through
the possibilities afforded by the United Nations. We must
not forget that man has already left his tracks upon the
moon, and that this incredible feat opens to space
technology the path that will lead to other celestial bodies
in our solar system. This is why we reiterate the request by
the United Nations in the above-mentioned resolution that
the effective co-operation of the developing countries
should be enlisted in this matter which is of such
importance for the advancement of the peoples of the
world.

30. We cannot but express our satisfaction that the
celebration of the International Education Year has also
been included in the agenda of the twenty-fourth session. It
is a happy coincidence for us that my Government should
have declared 1969 to be Education Year.

31. This subject reminds us that education is a vital factor
in the development of human resources and that, while
helping to perfect man, it also equips him to assume the
grave responsibilities of our time. This is why we would
urge the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to use every means available to it to
ensure that consideration is given to the desirability of
carrying out studies on the need to adopt a system of
compulsory secondary education.

32. The universal problems facing this important sector of
education stem from the situation produced by the
inadequacies of a primary education that is not completed
by secondary education.

33. The development of education offers an effective
means of making some progress in the fight against racism
and racial discrimination, which has concerned the United
Nations to such an extent that it has designated 1971 as the
International Year for action to combat this type of
discrimination.

34. This question also involves the training of young
people with a view to the development of national areas.
We must overcome the obstacles in the way of the
participation of the younger generations in a world that is
struggling to break out of its archaic mould and to
inaugurate the era of development in all fields of human
activity, which must necessarily affect the destiny of
nations and the objectives pursued by the basic principles
of this Organization.

35. It is to be hoped that the postulates of the Economic
and Social Council will be interpreted more correctly in the
General Assembly so that-national policies will encourage
young people to play a greater part in building the modern
world.

36. We are hearing a great deal of criticism of the
slowness, inertia and even inefficiency of the United
Nations. If this is true, we seem to forget that the blame
rests on all of us. We are all equally responsible for it and
under an equal obligation to rescue the United Nations
from its present situation.

37. In fulfilment of our duty to the Organization, we
would urge you to recognize, at this twenty-fourth session,
the historic responsibility which we were called upon to
assume in instituting this great international system. In
acknowledging this, we are compelled to strengthen the
structure of the Organization, imbue it with the necessary
vigour and place our trust in it, so that it will not perish,
because our hopes of peace are founded on it.

38. I am moved to recall in this Assembly, as our President
recalled at a time of conflict in my country, that in 1863,
eight-seven years after the United States of America became
independent, Abraham Lincoln, an apostolic figure and a
symbol of man’s equality and of the freedom of the people,
condemned violence, proclaimed the reconciliation a of his
countrymen and invoked, as the touchstone for settling all
human conflicts, man’s moral judgement and the grace of
Almighty God.

39. Let us prepare ourselves to take part in this new
session with sincerity, high-mindedness, impartiality and
love for our fellow men. Let us enter this hall again with
the eager and healthy enthusiasm with which a convalescent
returns to his daily life. Let us enter this noble hall in a
lofty and hopeful state of mind and spirit as befits the
present situation, inspired by optimism and the will to
succeed, with the joyful and full heart of which a great
French poet speaks, and with the unsullied spirit and
infectious enthusiasm of the person who, without fanfare
and with an overflowing heart, takes up the threads of his
life again.

40. These are my wishes and the wishes of my Government
and of our supreme leader and President Dr. Joaquin
Balaguer. And these are the hopes with which, at this
solemn moment, I address the delegations assembled here.