179. Madam President, it gives me great pleasure to extend to you, 
on behalf of my Government and myself, our sincerest congratulations 
on your election to the high office of President of the General
Assembly. We welcome you as an eminent representative of
the African Member States of this Organization. We do so
in full awareness of the outstanding qualifications and the
long experience in United Nations affairs which you bring
to the important task you are called upon to fulfil. The fact
that for the second time in the history of the United
Nations the highest office of our Organization is entrusted
to a lady adds a special note to the sentiments with which
we greet your election.

180. We also wish to express our great appreciation of the
important contribution of our Secretary-General to 
international co-operation.

181. In drawing up a balance-sheet of the development of
international relations in the past twelve months, we cannot
fail to take note with grave concern of the new dimension
of international tension which has emerged in the Far East.
It casts its shadow over the world scene as a whole. At the
same time, all the crises and conflicts which we discussed
here a year ago—manifestations of the use of force and
violence in relations between nations—continue to frustrate
our efforts to improve international relations. 

182. Yet we can also note encouraging features in the
developments of the past twelve months. In Viet-Nam,
though the violence and destruction continue, the trend at
least has been reversed, The bombing of North Viet-Nam
has been stopped, the level of fighting in South Viet-Nam
appears to nave been somewhat reduced and talks between
the principal parties to the conflict are in progress. 

183. In the Middle East, while violent action has increased
between Israel and its Arab neighbours, the joint effort of
the four leading Powers, permanent members of the
Security Council, to seek a peaceful solution of the
conflict, strengthens our confidence in their willingness to
co-operate, in accordance with their special responsibilities
under the Charter, to prevent any danger to international
peace and security. It is regrettable that no progress has
been made towards establishing a lasting and just peace in
the area. But this session of the General Assembly, attended
as it is by prominent representatives of all the countries
concerned, should offer an opportunity of making a fresh
effort in that direction.

184. Our hopes for world peace are also strengthened by
the willingness of the two leading nuclear Powers—the
Soviet Union and the United States—to begin negotiations
on the limitation of strategic armaments and thus to
continue along the road of arms control in the spirit of the
Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in
Outer space and under water and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution
2373 (XXII)]. It must be a universal hope that those talks
should start without any further delay and that for their
duration both Powers agree to refrain from any steps that
might intensify the nuclear arms race. There can be no
doubt that the outcome of those talks will largely determine 
not only the prospects of further progress in the field
of disarmament and arms control, but also the future trend
of international relations as a whole. At the same time, it
should be emphasized that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons should speedily be brought into
force as the cornerstone of any future system of nuclear
arms control. 

185. It is further encouraging that at long last serious
negotiations on United Nations peace-keeping activities are
now in progress. Experience has shown that the use of
United Nations peace-keeping services has become an
indispensable means of containing and controlling international 
crises and conflicts as an aid in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Agreement between the leading
Powers on the principles and procedures to be followed in
such activities would considerably strengthen the capacity
of the United Nations to fulfil its primary task, which is the
maintenance of international peace and security.

186. Thus, while the rivalry between the great Powers
continues in many areas, there appears in greater measure a
willingness on their part to work together to discharge their
joint responsibility for the preservation of peace. There
need be no contradiction between those two tendencies. We
cannot expect that all conflicts of interest or differences of
ideology between nations can be made to disappear. But we
can hope that all disputes will be resolved in accordance
with the principles of the United Nations Charter. 

187. There is no doubt that increasing understanding
between the leading Powers tends to give rise to suspicion
among many small nations, which history has taught to fear
that agreement between the powerful may sometimes be
reached at the expense of the weak. Yet, in the present age,
co-operation between the leading Powers is a necessary
prerequisite for the preservation of peace in the world, and
thus in the vital interest of all nations. Naturally, such
co-operation between the great Powers, as between all
nations, must be based on respect for the principle of the
sovereign equality of all States, which is a cornerstone of
the United Nations. By strengthening this Organization we
can most effectively strengthen the basis of international
peace and security, as well as that of the independence of
every nation.

188. In this connexion I should like to state once again
that, in the view of the Finnish Government, the collective
security system of the United Nations van be truly effective
only when it is universal. Accordingly, we hold the view
that the seat of China i the United Nations belongs to the
People’s Republic of China. We also believe that the other
nations that remain outside the United Nations should be
given the opportunity of participating in the work of the
Organization in appropriate ways.

189. For a neutral country like Finland, which bases its
security not on military alliances or the protection of one
Power or group of Powers against others but on a foreign
policy designed to keep it outside international conflicts, it
is a natural interest that it should work for a peaceful and
rational world order anchored in the universal collective
security system of the United Nations Charter, We believe
that we can do so best by adhering strictly to our policy of
neutrality. This policy, while it enjoins us to refrain from
taking sides in disputes between the great Powers, enables
us to maintain friendly relations with all States across the
dividing lines of ideology and military blocs. On this basis it
is possible for us to make an active contribution to the
peaceful settlement of international disputes. 

190. It is equally natural that on a regional basis Finland is
actively interested in developing a system of security
embracing the whole of Europe. As is known, the Finnish
Government has taken an initiative in this direction and
announced its readiness to act as host of a European
security conference. We believe that Finland may be
qualified for such a role by virtue of its neutral position
with regard to the central issues dividing Europe today, as
well as by its friendly ties with all the Governments
concerned. 

191. Speaking on the situation in Europe, the President of 
Finland, Mr. Urho Kekkonen, said in his speech of 15 July 
of this year, during his state visit to Great Britain, that: 

“...since the end of the Second World War we have
experienced in Europe the longest period of peace in this 
century and years ago reached a stage in which no 
changes in Europe could any longer be made through war
or violence but only through peaceful negotiations”.

President Kekkonen continued:
“Threats to peace are no longer the classical threats
inherent in ambitious and evil plans of one State or
another, but the danger of war itself with its unbelievably
destructive consequences. All in all, we have come to the
point where the problems of Europe are easier to control
than the great world problems which have appeared on the 
scene. Even so, we often look at the European situation 
from an outdated point of view, living in fear of 
dangers that perhaps no longer exist. A new way of
thinking and a new approach are essential.”

192. The Finnish Government will continue to work 
together with other Governments in order to promote
constructive negotiations on the solution of the problems
of European security. In this connexion I may mention that
the Foreign Ministers of the five Nordic countries,
Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Finland, at their 
recent meeting in Reykjavik, declared their support for the
initiative taken by the Finnish Government in the matter of
a European security conference and their desire to continue
to explore the possibilities of preparing for such a conference. 

193. I have stressed the importance of co-operation 
between the leading Powers in our efforts to solve major
political. problems which confront the Organization. This is 
also true in regard to the problems of southern Africa. 
Another year has gone by without any improvement in the
situation. Sanctions have not yet brought down the illegal 
régime in Southern Rhodesia. We should therefore do our
utmost to make the sanctions more effective. With regard 
to Namibia we have not yet been able to agree on the
means by which the United Nations could discharge its
direct responsibility for the territory. The illegal occupation 
of Namibia continues, while in South Africa the policies of
apartheid are intensified in complete disregard of fundamental 
human rights. Finally, in the Portuguese Territories
the colonial Power continues in its persistent refusal to 
recognize the legitimate right of the population to freedom
and independence. 

194. It is understandable that in these circumstances many
of us, and in particular many Africans, are beginning to
despair of finding a solution to the problems of southern
Africa through peaceful means offered by the United
Nations. In the face of this increased danger of racial
conflict it is necessary to intensify our search for constructive
and effective action to reverse the trend in southern
Africa. For this, co-operation between the leading Powers is
essential.

195. The appalling human sacrifice which the continued
fighting in Nigeria is causing the civilian population is
causing great distress in Finland as in many other countries.
The Governments of the Nordic countries have addressed to
the leaders of the parties to the conflict numerous and
urgent appeals which have been motivated by the desire to
make the relief work more effective. The Nordic countries
offer their support for any measure which may contribute
to a solution of the conflict, We have followed with interest
the efforts of the Organization of African Unity to solve
the Nigerian conflict and we believe that this Organization
is specially qualified to help to find a basis for a negotiated
solution.

196. Madam President, as we approach the beginning of
the Second United Nations Development Decade we have
reason for critical self-examination. The experience of the
past ten years shows that it is no longer enough to state
broad objectives and design over-all policies. In the preparations 
for the Second Development Decade it is necessary to
agree upon plans of greater detail and precision so as to
enable us better to marshal our resources and review the
progress made.

197. At the same time it must be emphasized that while a
revitalization of aid policies is of great importance it is only
one instrument at the disposal of the world community.
Lack of true progress in international trade policies to the
benefit of the developing nations is a matter of great
concern. A fresh effort is called for to give the developing
countries a greater share in world trade.

198. The Finnish Government has recently undertaken a
thorough assessment of Finland’s contribution to the
Second Development Decade and as a result proposed to
Parliament a programme designed to achieve, in stages, the 
aid target of 1 per cent of the gross national product.
Accordingly, in 1970, Finland’s contribution to economic
development aid will increase by one third and will grow
steadily year by year.