39. Madam President, I should like first of all, on
behalf of the delegation of Greece and personally, to offer
you our warm congratulations on your election as President
of the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly. Your
election is a well-deserved tribute to your personal qualities
and a recognition of the positive and constructive role
played by your country—with which Greece maintains
traditionally friendly relations—in international affairs.

40. I should again on this occasion like to pay a tribute
the memory of the late President Arenales, an eminent
statesman dedicated to the cause of peace and international
co-operation, who to the end of his life continued to strive
for the promotion and safeguarding of the principles of the
United Nations.

41. The twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly is
opening under the portent of the conquest of space.
Through the staggering progress of American science and
technology, two astronauts have accomplished a feat which
will be for ever the hallmark of our age. Men of earth have
set foot on the moon, and what seemed a symbol of the 
impossible has become a reality.

42. In this new age, the age of exploits which until
recently belonged to the world of science fiction, man
conquers outer space but is still a victim of his ancestral
passions and prejudices.

43. Proof of this is given in the statement of the
Secretary-General on the progress of our world affairs. In 
the introduction to his annual report [A/7601/Add.1] U Thant 
has brought us face to face with the crises and conflicts 
which together threaten the international community and 
blatantly the principles upon which Organization is based.

44. The cannons roar ever more threateningly in
Middle East, the Viet-Nam war drags on, two great Powers
confront each other on the Sino-Soviet frontier, the
fratricidal war in Nigeria has not been brought to an end,
disarmament negotiations are merely marking time, and
economic problems of the developing countries still await a
just solution.

45. Should I add, to deplore it, the refusal of certain
Members of the United Nations to abide by the resolutions
of the General Assembly and of the Security Council?

46. It is, of course, far from the Greek delegation's
intention to underestimate what our Organization has 
already been able to accomplish, or to try to paint too
gloomy a picture. However, we believe that our faith in the 
future of the United Nations should not prevent us from 
striking a balance or drawing the necessary conclusions.

47. The Secretary-General, in his periodic reports and on 
many other occasions, has constantly drawn our attention
to our duty to take all the necessary measures to contribute
effectively to the economic progress of developing countries.

48. Technical progress, which offers immense possibilities
for accelerating economic development, has so far done
nothing but widen the gap that separates the prosperous
from the less privileged nations. If we want to prevent the 
division of our world into two opposite camps, between
poor and rich countries or between north and south, then
we must show a creative brotherhood and take courageous
initiatives. Peace is incompatible with misery and ignorance,
and cannot be secured while the masses of the population
are overcome by disillusion and despair.

49. Our recent awareness of the need to draw up a new
global strategy for economic development is an encouraging
and promising omen for the success of the Second United
Nations Development Decade. Furthermore, the consensus
reached on the exploitation of the resources of the sea-bed
proves that nations can now play a pioneering role in the 
search for new methods of developing the resources of our
planet for the benefit of all mankind.

50. Thus, without being complacent, we can say that we
are going forward on the right economic and social path,
thanks particularly to the leads given by the United Nations.

51. Politically, the situation in the Middle East is a
constant source of anxiety. Aware of its dangers, the Greek
Government considers that the provisions of Security Council 
[resolution 242 (1967)] offer the ground for a just
and equitable settlement of the conflict.

52. Two years have passed, however, since the unanimous
adoption of that resolution: two years of tension, disillusion 
and bloodshed. The sufferings of the people of the region are 
increasing; the occupation continues and aggravates the struggle 
of the Palestinians pro domo sua; positions harden and peace 
seems more distant than ever.

53. When Mr. Jarring’s mission was suspended, our attention and 
hopes turned to the four-Power consultations started last April. 
We welcomed that initiative. Far from interpreting it as an effort 
by the great Powers to solve that grave problem outside the 
United Nations, we considered it to be a collective effort by the 
four permanent members of the Security Council to devise practical 
means of implementing the resolution.

54. The apparent lack of results from those four-Power
consultations and the recent escalation of increasingly grave
incidents have created an explosive situation. We see with
horror the rise of the fearsome spectre of a war which,
while incapable of solving the problems it is supposed to
settle, might directly affect international peace and security.

55. The Greek delegation wishes to endorse the appeal made 
by the Secretary-General to members of the Security Council
—both individually and collectively—at the time of the tragic 
death of Major Plane

“...to do all within their power to influence events in
a new and constructive direction”.

56. However, since in the final analysis the solution to the
problem depends entirely on the countries involved in the
conflict, it is obvious that only their moderation and realism 
can lead to a peaceful settlement. We feel, and I repeat this, 
that the firmest basis for an agreement that will
finally bring the conflict to an end is to be found in the
resolution adopted unanimously by the Security Council in
November 1967. All the principles on which peace in that
area must be based appear in that resolution.

57. When speaking of trouble spots we must inevitably
think of the war in Viet-Nam, which though not on the
agenda of the General Assembly remains an obsessive
thought at the back of our minds. The continued suffering
and loss of human life are bound to haunt the conscience of
all peace-loving peoples.

58. During the last session of the General Assembly the
Greek delegation shared the generally felt relief at the
opening of conversations in Paris. After a year of apparently 
sterile negotiations the international community is deeply 
disquieted at their lack of progress.

59. The United States of America has adopted courageous
measures to create a propitious atmosphere for the success
of the talks, and has given assurances which should satisfy
even those most sceptical about its future.

60. The bombing of North Viet-Nam has ceased and the
American administration has carried out a de-escalation of
operations and a first withdrawal of troops from Viet-Nam.
We believe it would be untoward to expect similar measures
from Hanoi. Merely to accuse or exhort the party that has
undeniably already adopted specific measures for military
disengagement cannot relieve Hanoi of its grave responsibility 
for prolonging the sufferings inflicted upon the Viet-Namese 
people, or further the aim of bringing peace to the country.

61. In southern Africa, where traces and consequences of
the colonial era linger on, the situation has in no way
improved.

62. Since the creation of our Organization Greece has
made every effort to support the United Nations in the
abolition of the colonial system, the recognition of the
right of peoples to self-determination and the elimination
of racial discrimination. It is still ready to play its part in
the search for realistic and reasonable solutions to ensure
that the principles and ideals for which we stand will
prevail.

63. A quarter of a century after the creation of the United
Nations our Organization cannot yet establish machinery
that will enable it effectively to fulfil its responsibilities as a
guardian of peace. Yet, in the light of experience, the
usefulness and value of its peace-keeping operations cannot
be denied.

64. It is truly disappointing to note that, although we
spend astronomical sums in strengthening and developing
our machinery for war, we struggle endlessly to find ways
of meeting the cost of the peace-keeping operations, for
maintaining that peace which is the primary responsibility
of the United Nations.

65. If we are to judge from the yearly increasing deficits,
the system of voluntary contributions has proved ineffective. 
Thus we are bound to be concerned over the bleak prospects 
we see ahead of us for the financing of present and future 
peace-keeping operations. The Greek delegation has supported 
all proposals to remedy this state of affairs.

66, In a spirit of devotion to the cause of peace and an
acute awareness of its ‘responsibilities, Greece played a
leading role in the solution of the grave crisis in Cyprus in
1967. Since then it has contributed to everything that its
duty required to the improvement of the situation in the
island.

67. It must be admitted that the encouraging turn of
events in the Republic of Cyprus is due primarily to the
attitude of the Cypriot Government. The Cypriot leaders
have, indeed, undertaken courageous measures—not yet
reciprocated—towards a peaceful settlement, and have
likewise shown flexibility and moderation in starting and
continuing intercommunal talks. As for the substance of
the problem, the Government of Cyprus has submitted
most constructive and realistic proposals which pay due
regard to the special interests of their Turkish Cypriot
fellow citizens.

68. Since, in the present circumstances, pessimism would
be a poor counsellor, we continue to hope that the Turkish
side will realize that these proposals are genuine, and
remember that a setback to the present talks would serve
the interests of no one.

69. The road ahead is still long. Much perseverance, good
sense and realism will be needed from both sides for a final
solution that will benefit all the people of Cyprus.

70. Greece, which has so far contributed more than
$8 million to the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, is fully cognizant of the burden of maintaining that
force. The Greek delegation, therefore, wishes to express its
appreciation to those countries which in a spirit of
international brotherhood, either by furnishing military
contingents or through voluntary contributions, have enabled the peace-keeping operation in Cyprus to continue.

71. I should like also to avail myself of this opportunity to
pay tribute to all those who have contributed to this
improvement in the situation in Cyprus, and particularly to
the Secretary-General, who has worked unceasingly to
reach the goals set forth in the Security Council resolution
of 4 March 1964 [resolution 186 (1964)].

72. Now that the blue skies of the Eastern Mediterranean
are darkened by so many threatening clouds, it is encouraging 
to note that, thanks in large measure to the efforts of
the United Nations, at least one people in one corner of
that region is turning to the work of peace and prosperity.

73. I should like to conclude my statement by reiterating
Greece’s attachment to the policy of friendly relations with
all members of the international community regardless of
their political and social systems, a policy based on respect
for sovereignty, independence, and non-intervention in the
internal affairs of others.

74. In the view of my Government peaceful coexistence,
although an important step towards relief of tension,
cannot be considered an end in itself. A truce in the cold
war does not bring the world all the blessings of peace. The
small countries cannot feel free from danger or turn
peacefully to the search for a better life as long as our
world is liable at any.moment to become once again a
battleground where, on one pretext or another, the
interests of the giants clash. That clash will not be
prevented by amassing increasingly destructive weapons. It
is therefore urgently necessary to hasten the search for
ways of limiting the production of weapons of mass
destruction.

75. We hope that the contacts established between the 
United States and the Soviet Union will bear fruit and so
realize the hopes of all men of goodwill.

76. We also hope for speedy progress in the economic
development of the developing nations; for a reduction of 
the enormous gap between the living levels of the 
industrialized and the developing countries would obviously be
one stabilizing factor. If that gap were narrowed, we could
hope for a new era of peace and security in the world.