68. The Hungarian delegation has listened attentively to the analysis
of the international situation and of the encouraging and
alarming features of international life given by the delegations
participating in this session of the General Assembly.
It has likewise welcomed with great interest the proposals
put forward by the delegations, all of which, without
exception, desire to perform more successfully than hitherto
our great task of preventing a thermonuclear world war
and of safeguarding and consolidating peace.

69. Of course, the delegations have not viewed international
developments from the same standpoint and have
often reached different conclusions. Nevertheless, their
analyses show a surprising degree of similarity and often
display many common features, identical or similar
thoughts.

70. Last year the world succeeded in averting a new
critical change for the worse in the international situation.
At the same time it is obvious that efforts to solve the
complex international problems referred to by the Secretary-General
in his annual report [A/7601/Add.1] have not
led to satisfactory results and that we are merely marking
time. This is extremely dangerous, for delay in solving
controversial problems is fraught with the permanent
danger of a sudden and serious turn in the international
situation. I think we all agree that we must do more.

71. The past year was called by some the year of
expectations and hopes. Indeed, a year ago — and even
earlier — the peoples were hoping that significant progress
would be made towards the settlement of burning international
issues. That hope was based on the numerous encouraging
signs discernible in international politics at the
end of last year and the beginning of this. The United
States has ceased its bombing of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam and agreed to start negotiations with representatives
of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
National Liberation Front of South Viet-Nam. During last
year’s presidential election campaign in the United States,
statements were made concerning the intention to settle
controversial international issues. In the Federal Republic
of Germany, too, it seemed that a sane judgement was
beginning to prevail and that the ruling circles in that
country were at long last abandoning their anachronistic
ideas on foreign policy. In spite of many disturbing factors,
the disarmament talks at Geneva were continued and even intensified.

72. Despite all these factors, the events of the past year
failed in many respects to justify the peoples’ hopes.

73. With settlement of the Viet-Nam issue, no progress
worth mentioning has been made. There has still not been
any significant reduction in the number of United States
occupation forces. True, the United States Government has
announced the withdrawal of 25,000 American soldiers
from Viet-Nam, to be followed by a further 35,000. But
this withdrawal will not bring about any essential change, as
there will still remain in South Viet-Nam about half a
million American troops. Moreover, if the withdrawal
continues at this pace it may drag out over a number of
years. In the Saigon puppet theatre the figures sometimes
change but the policy remains the same. The Government
of the United States clearly insists on supporting the
discredited and thoroughly unpopular Thieu regime and is
unwilling to contribute to the formation of a provisional
coalition government which would hold general, free and
democratic elections. The United States negotiator is
holding up the negotiations in Paris with endless delaying
tactics. All this shows that the ruling circles of the United
States refuse to draw the lessons from their failure in
Viet-Nam and are basically still striving to attain their
previous well-known objects.

74. Nor has the situation improved in the Middle East.
The Government of Israel continues, in defiance of the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
[242 (1967)], to pursue its aggressive course. Some Western
Powers affect to make every effort to persuade Israel,
and act as though the solution of the problem did not
depend on them. But is it really conceivable that the
Western Powers could not influence the Israeli Government
if they really consider it their vital business to do so? The
sale of Phantom aircraft does not in any case help to attain
this goal.

75. Hopes were also entertained in the past year that the
situation in Europe would develop favourably. These hopes
were strengthened by the Appeal issued to all European
peoples by the Budapest meeting of the Political Consultative
Committee of the countries of the Warsaw Treaty
Organization, and the response it met with throughout the
world. However, the leading NATO Powers continue to
make reservations concerning the idea of a European
security system and try to play for time. What is more,
some NATO Powers lay down impossible conditions and
strive to prevent the establishment of such a system.

76. The world community cannot ignore that some
Western countries are stepping up their war preparations.
The United States has decided to create an anti-ballistic
defence system, thereby opening a new phase in the
armaments race; and the Federal Republic of Germany is
continuing to develop the Bundeswehr, which will soon be
one of the most powerful armies in the world; in both these
countries chemical and bacteriological weapons continue to
be produced and stockpiled. Naturally these measures do
not improve the international climate.

77. I cannot remain silent about the frustration of
international understanding by the endeavours of some
Western Powers to drive a wedge between the socialist
countries. Some imperialist ruling circles cherish vain hopes
of taking advantage of the difficulties which have
arisen — through the fault of the Chinese leaders — between China
and other socialist countries.

78. As will be seen, the main obstacle to the easing of
international tension and to a speedier and more successful
solution of international problems is that Western Powers
continue to maintain, in essence, their old policies. The
sooner they change those policies, the sooner favourable
conditions will be established for improving the international
atmosphere and consolidating peace The international
situation cannot take a turn for the better unless
the United States changes its Viet-Nam policy and takes
seriously the task of finding a peaceful settlement of the
problem; unless, instead of the arms race, it really strives to
bring about substantive talks; unless Israel and the Western
Powers which support it stop playing with fire and
implement the Security Council resolution; unless the
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany renounces
its revanchist policy and accepts the situation
which has developed in Europe; and unless the main NATO
Powers abandon their delaying tactics and accept the
constructive proposals made for the creation of a European
security system.

79. Fortunately for the world, other forces are active on
the international scene and the prevailing mood is a genuine
desire to serve the cause of peace and security, oppose
warlike tendencies, lessen international tension and settle
controversial international issues. These are the forces and
aspirations of the socialist and other peace-loving States and
of hundreds of millions of people fighting for peace. It is
due, first and foremost, to this state of affairs that efforts
to broaden international co-operation and solve certain
important problems also meet with some successes.

80. Permit me to explain in more detail my Government’s
position on some international questions.

81. My Government continues to regard the halting of
United States aggression in Viet-Nam and the peaceful
settlement of that question as the most important international
issue. Our delegation to sessions of the General
Assembly of the United Nations has repeatedly declared
that a final settlement in Viet-Nam will be possible only if
the United States, unconditionally and without a threat of
renewed bombings, ceases its bombing of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam. Numerous signs go to show that the
ruling circles of the United States have not ceased to utter
threats, alleging as their reason the lack of any positive
response by the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam to their
initiatives. The United States has bombed a sovereign
socialist country, and now that it is forced to cease its
bombings it is demanding some kind of compensation.
What kind of strange logic — to put it mildly — is that?
History has already long since shown that the heroic people
of Viet-Nam cannot be intimidated and that the circles
ruling the United States only complicate their position by
such threats.

82. An outstanding event occurred in the spring of this
year when the Provisional Revolutionary Government of
the Republic of South Viet-Nam was set up. The Hungarian
People’s Republic has recognized that Government as the
only lawful representative of the people of South Viet-Nam.
It agrees with its programme and considers that the
Viet-Nam problem can be settled only on the basis of that
programme, in the spirit of the Geneva Conventions. Those
who believe that the Viet-Nam question can be settled
through by-passing that Government by some kind of
reshuffling of the Saigon puppets are mistaken.

83. The President of the United States, speaking from this
rostrum on 18 September 1969 [1755th meeting], called
for international efforts to persuade Hanoi to agree to end
the war. But it is common knowledge that world public
opinion expects of the United States a sincere desire to end
the war in Viet-Nam, for its conclusion depends not on the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam but on the Government
of the United States. It is impossible, however, to take
seriously the empty American statements concerning the
right to self-determination of the people of South Viet-Nam,
for the United States policy is precisely what has
prevented and continues to prevent the genuine exercise of
that people’s right to self-determination.

84. My Government’s position on the Middle East situation
may be summed up as follows: it resolutely condemns
Israel’s aggressive policy and considers compliance with the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
[242 (1967)] to be essential. It is a matter of general
knowledge that Israel is not only opposed to that Security
Council resolution but is repeatedly committing new
aggressive acts and, what is more, has announced the
annexation of some Arab territories. The time has come for
the Security Council to implement its resolution. Peace in
the Middle East will be impossible until Israel has with-
drawn its troops from all the occupied Arab territories to
within the boundaries which existed prior to 5 June 1967.
The Hungarian People’s Republic will go on supporting the
just struggle of the Arab peoples for the attainment of that
goal. My Government highly appreciates the readiness of
the Arab peoples to wipe out the consequences of Israeli
aggression by political means and by the full implementation
of the Security Council resolution.

85. My Government attaches great importance to organized
measures for preserving and consolidating international
peace and security. Consequently it is in full agreement
with the request by the Soviet Government for inclusion in
the agenda of the present session of the United Nations
General Assembly of an item on the strengthening of
international security. The adoption by the General Assembly
of the United Nations of the draft appeal [see A/7654]
submitted for its consideration by the representative of the
Soviet Union would do much to further the cause of
international peace and security, strengthen the role of the
United Nations in the maintenance of peace, enhance the
prestige of the Security Council and at the same time
directly enlist in the defence of peace those countries which
are outside our world organization.

85. My Government duly values also the efforts made to
strengthen peace and security in particular parts of the
world. As you know, my Government was entrusted by the
Political Consultative Committee of the Warsaw Treaty
Organization with the task of conveying to the Governments
of the European countries its appeal concerning the
creation of a system of European security. In the course of
this honourable mission we became even more convinced
that the conditions for establishing the beginnings of a
system of European security were fully satisfied.

87. The Hungarian People’s Republic wishes to continue
to take an active part in the campaign to create a system of
European security, and supports every step directed towards
that end. We particularly highly appreciate the
Finnish Government’s constructive proposal on this question
and are convinced that it will considerably promote
the attainment of this goal. We are, of course, interested in
the peaceful development of other parts of the world as
well, and welcome the Soviet proposal for the creation of
an Asian security system, the implementation of which
would help to safeguard the peace and security of the Asian
peoples and at the same time of the whole world.

88. One of the main problems of world coexistence is the
achievement of general and complete disarmament. In our
view, we shall not be able to make significant progress
towards disarmament unless a stop can be put to the arms
race inspired by some Western Powers.

89. Even a few isolated results can have a favourable effect
on the achievement of disarmament and on the international
situation. For this reason, the Hungarian People’s
Republic was among the first to ratify the Treaty on the
partial banning of nuclear tests and the Treaty on the
Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution
2373 (XXII)]. But the results achieved must not allow us
to forget that much still remains to be done. We fully agree
with the Soviet proposals concerning the conclusion of
international conventions on prohibition of the production
of nuclear weapons, the reduction of existing stockpiles,
and subsequently the total prohibition of nuclear weapons,
the limitation and reduction of the means of delivery of
strategic nuclear weapons, and the immediate suspension of
all kinds of nuclear tests, and on the use of the sea-bed
exclusively for peaceful purposes. Particular efforts should
be made to bring about the prohibition of the development,
production, stockpiling and use of all kinds of weapons of
mass destruction, including chemical and bacteriological
weapons. In our view, the inclusion in the agenda of the
General Assembly session of the relevant proposal — of
which our delegation is a sponsor — and the adoption of the
aforementioned proposals by the Soviet delegation would
represent considerable progress towards the achievement of
general and complete disarmament. It is for the Western
Powers to give a positive reply to these proposals.

90. The Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic
has a high opinion of the activities of the Geneva
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which can
play an important role in working for a solution of
problems connected with disarmament. A few weeks ago,
the Hungarian People’s Republic, too, received an invitation
to participate in the work of this Committee. We accepted
that honourably invitation with pleasure, and our representative
is already participating in the Committee’s efforts to
fulfil the important tasks facing it.

91. Ever since the Hungarian People’s Republic became a
Member of the United Nations, it has endeavoured to
ensure the effective aid successful working of that Organization.
However, summing up the activities of the United
Nations, we are forced to conclude that, despite the efforts
of its numerous Member States, the Organization has fallen
short of the complete fulfilment of its task.

92. I should like to point out that units of the United
States army, under cover of the United Nations flag, are
still stationed in South Korea, whence they organize armed
sorties against the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea
The United Nations must demand the withdrawal of
American troops from South Korea, the dissolution of the
so-called United Nations Commission for the Unification
and Rehabilitation of Korea, and condemn the possibility
of armed actions being carried out by the United States
forces under cover of the United Nations flag.

93. My Government has always supported the principle of
the universality of the United Nations. We cannot agree
that some sovereign and independent States should be
excluded from the family of the United Nations merely
because their social system does not please certain Powers.
This applies, above all, to the People’s Republic of China,
whose lawful rights in the United Nations have not yet been
restored. The United Nations has given the Federal Republic
of Germany the opportunity of sending an observer to
its meetings, but at the same time it refuses this right to the
other German State — the German Democratic Republic — which 
is consistently fighting to preserve peace, and to
other socialist countries. There should be no room in the
United Nations for this type of discrimination.

94. The Heads of many delegations have drawn our
attention to the question of making the work of the United
Nations more effective. In our view, one way of achieving
this is to ensure the effective implementation of the
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The
General Assembly and the Security Council have adopted a
number of good resolutions designed to solve serious
international problems. But the results are still meagre. I
have already referred to the fact that the Government of
Israel is unwilling to respect the Security Council resolution
of 22 November 1967 [242 (1967)]. The resolutions
adopted concerning Zimbabwe, Namibia and the policy of
apartheid have largely remained dead letters, since they
have not been implemented. The General Assembly of the
United Nations adopted at its fifteenth session a declaration
on the necessity of bringing colonialism to an end. Nine
years have since passed, but in the Portuguese colonies
patriots continue to shed their blood, because this appeal
by the General Assembly goes unheeded by the Portuguese
Government.

95. My Government is deeply concerned by the problems
of developing countries and will continue to co-operate
with those who fight for the total liberation of colonial
territories. It supports the aspirations of the Zimbabwe
people to achieve their sovereignty and considers it a
disgrace that, in a territory under United Kingdom control,
the white minority should be able to oppress. the overwhelming 
majority of the population.

96. The Hungarian People’s Republic most resolutely
condemns the South African régime of racial hatred, which
is violating the fundamental human rights of the majority
of the population and holding the Namibian people in
colonial subjection. 

97. My Government considers that one of its most
important international tasks is to contribute towards the
success of the developing countries’ efforts to consolidate
their political and economic independence. This aim should
be furthered by the Second United Nations Development
Decade, which may become the most comprehensive
United Nations economic programme ever to exist so far.
The Hungarian Government supports the developing countries’ 
proposals, but considers that the discrimination
shown against the German Democratic Republic during the
preparations for the Second Development Decade is an
obstacle to their implementation.

98. That, then, is the position of the Government of the
Hungarian People’s Republic on the major international
issues. I can assure you that my Government will continue
to regard the furtherance of the cause of international
peace and security as its main task. It is prepared to support
any initiative which will help to achieve that object. At the
same time, it will not cease to draw attention to the
aspirations of imperialist circles which threaten the peace,
to signs of colonialism and neo-colonialism, and indefatigably 
to challenge those forces which hinder the development 
of international co-operation.

99. The Hungarian People’s Republic holds the United
Nations in high esteem and considers that - despite the
aforementioned deficiencies — it has done some useful work.
My Government has supported and continues to support
the work of U Thant, the universally respected Secretary-General 
of the United Nations, for it is convinced that his
endeavours serve the cause of universal peace, the security
of mankind and co-operation among peoples.

100. The Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic
agrees that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations should be fittingly observed at Headquarters during
the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations. The question should be considered of
whether States Members of the United Nations should be
represented by Heads of State or Government. The anniversary 
might afford an occasion, in the course of the
general debate, for the adoption of instruments designed to
further the solution of certain international problems.

101. In conclusion, I should like to express the gratitude
of my delegation to Miss Angie Brooks, the President of
this twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly, for the
successful way in. which she has performed her task in the
present difficult circumstances. We wish her further success
in her activities, and hope that this session of the General
Assembly will promote co-operation among the countries
and nations of the world, and the solution of burning
international problems.