99. Madam President, on behalf
of my delegation, I wish to extend my heartiest congratulations 
to you on your election to the high office of President
of this Assembly. Your election is not only a recognition of
your personal qualities and accomplishments, of your
outstanding professional qualifications, but also a tribute to
your country, Liberia, as well as to the whole continent of
Africa which is playing an increasingly prominent role in
our common pursuit of freedom, peace and progress. I am
confident that under your enlightened Presidency, our
deliberations will be guided to a successful conclusion.

100. Permit me also to express my delegation’s profound
regret at the passing away of your eminent predecessor,
Mr. Emilio Arenales, whose dedication to the cause of
world peace is well known. We wish to convey to the
delegation of Guatemala our deep sense of sorrow at the
loss of one of Latin America’s most articulate advocates of
the lofty principles of the United Nations.

101. I should like furthermore to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General and assure him of the continued support
of my country in all his endeavours for the cause of world
peace and for his untiring devotion to the service of
humanity. 

102. Today is the first of October. On this day, the
Indonesian people commemorate the Pantjasila, the five
principles of our state philosophy. It is a day of rededication 
to those five principles, the source of our political and
social thinking from which emanates our independent and
active foreign policy, now known as non-alignment. Non-alignment 
is inherent to the Indonesian nation and its desire
to be friends with all nations that reciprocate its sentiments
for friendship and co-operation, for progress and world
peace. It was on this basis that Indonesia participated in the
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned 
Countries in Belgrade in 1961 and in Cairo in 1964.
We participated in the Consultative Meeting of the Representatives 
of the Governments of Non-Aligned Countries
held in Belgrade in July 1969 and in the meeting of foreign
ministers and heads of delegations of non-aligned States
here at the United Nations last Saturday. We will continue
to join forces with other non-aligned nations in the search
for peace and a better world to live in.

103. In reviewing some areas and events which have
occupied our attention since the last session, I will first
refer to the prolonged war in Viet-Nam which has caused
great concern to the Government and people of Indonesia.
The continuation of the talks in Paris, the de-escalation of
the fighting and the announced withdrawal of American
troops from Viet-Nam have given us grounds for hope of a
settlement. But progress has been painfully slow and is all
but overshadowed by the spectre of the battlefield.

104. Nevertheless, we continue to cherish the hope that
new initiatives will brighten the prospect for peace in that
area. Indonesia is willing to assist in whatever way it can, if
requested by the parties involved, to turn this hope into
reality and will support all practical measures — particularly
through the United Nations — which may bring real peace to
the region. We must not forget that for nearly thirty years
the people of Viet-Nam have suffered unceasingly the terror
and scourge of war. The people of Viet-Nam highly deserve
the peace that will enable them to decide for themselves
what their future will be without outside interference.

105. During the last year the Government and people of
Indonesia have also been greatly concerned over the
discouraging course of events in the Middle East and in
southern Africa. Both questions have been the focus of
United Nations attention since the early years of its
existence. Both areas are still the source of conflict
involving Members of the United Nations itself. The annual
discussions by the General Assembly have left the ultimate
responsibility for both questions up to the Security
Council, and thus have challenged the very heart of the
United Nations. When developments in each case reached a
stage of extreme crisis, the Indonesian people felt strongly
about the situation. My Government deemed it therefore
necessary to participate actively in the search for a solution
in the Security Council although we are not a member of that body.

106. With regard to the Middle East, my country is
alarmed and deeply concerned with the deteriorating
situation, especially of the last few months. Explosive as
the situation has become, we are afraid that it may lead to a
larger war, endangering the peace and security of the world.

107. The behaviour and designs of Israel since the last
session have given us little cause for encouragement or
grounds to entertain hope for an improvement in the
situation. The arson committed against Al Aqsa Mosque, so
sacred and dear to Indonesian Moslems as well as to the
entire Moslem world, under the responsibility of the illegal
military occupation by Israel, has made the situation even
worse and demands immediate action before it develops
beyond all hopes for a negotiated settlement.

108. Our position on the central issue remains unchanged
and I can only repeat what I said last year to the General
Assembly [1680th meeting]. We cannot condone acquisition 
of other people’s territory by military force. We
believe that a just solution can be reached on the basis a
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967. The withdrawal of Israeli forces to the lines they
occupied before the war of June 1967 constitutes an
essential element for a negotiated settlement.

109. As the country with the largest Muslim majority in
South-East Asia, we feel that our vital interests are involved
with the outcome of the struggle of our Arab brothers in
the Middle East.

110. We also regret that the unarmed members of the
United Nations group of observers now find themselves in
the grip of virtual war. My Government fully agrees with
the Secretary-General’s assessment of the seriousness of the
situation, and hopes that adequate safeguards will be
provided for the lives of those men of peace.

111. That virtual state of war in the Middle East is a grave
setback for the United Nations and a continued threat to
international peace and security. Both the Security Council
and the General Assembly have adopted resolutions in clear
language regarding the situation. Only firm action now to
implement those decisions can save the situation from
getting out of hand.

112. On the questions of Namibia, and apartheid in South
Africa and Zimbabwe, we have frequently expressed our
abhorrence for the policies and tactics of the racist
Government of South Africa and the illegal white minority
régime in Zimbabwe, which are rapidly tightening their
harsh grip on the majority of the native population in the
whole area.

113. The Government of Indonesia feels very strongly that
ways and means should be found to enforce United Nations
decisions demanding South Africa’s withdrawal from
Namibia and granting independence to that Territory as
early as possible. As a member of the Council for Namibia,
we shall continue to exert every effort to reach that goal.

114. As for the situation in Zimbabwe, almost four years
have elapsed since the unilateral declaration of independence 
of 11 November 1965. No progress has been made in
our search for a solution. The illegal minority régime of Ian
Smith is still in power. The question has become more
complex in view of the already condemned collaboration of
States Members of the United Nations with that illegal
régime, in open defiance of United Nations resolutions.

115. We fully endorse the spirit and ideals of the Charter
of the Organization of African Unity, which was reiterated
in the Lusaka Manifesto on Southern Africa adopted by
the Fifth Summit Conference of East and Central African
States held from 14 to 16 April 1969, particularly in its
assertion that without a commitment to the principles of
human equality and freedom there can be no basis for
peace and justice in the world.

116. Facing the danger of a racial war, my delegation
believes that the time has come for the United Nations to
take strong action against the illegal régime of Ian Smith,
including all possible measures under Articles 41 and 42 of
the Charter, and to impose effective sanctions on South
Africa and Portugal. 

117. We are equally concerned about the situation in
Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau) and other Territories
still under colonial domination. We continue to support the
Struggle for freedom and independence of the peoples of
those Territories.

118. The continued defiance of both South Africa and
Israel of Security Council decisions has brought the United
Nations to a crisis which must be faced squarely and firmly.
If we miss the opportunity to demonstrate our determination
to uphold our principles, we will undermine our Organization.

119. In South-East Asia a dissonant element remains in
the strained relations between the People’s Republic of
China and most of its South-East Asian neighbours,
including Indonesia. We have followed with great interest
the developments within the People’s Republic of China.
We have not, however, noted a constructive change in its
attitude, at least towards my country. Apart from this
problem, the question of the representation of China as the
only Asian country to serve as a permanent member of the
Security Council is, beyond any doubt, important. As a
matter of principle, Indonesia maintains its view that the
People’s Republic of China should be represented in the
United Nations.

120. As far as our bilateral relations with China are
concerned, we are not in a position to reconsider our
attitude vis-a-vis that country as long as it continues to
pursue a policy of extreme and active enmity towards
Indonesia. Normalization of our relations with China can be
considered only if China shows a non-bellicose attitude and
ceases to assist and encourage subversive and rebellious
activities in our country.

121. Let me now turn to the highly complex and sensitive
issue of disarmament. I shall not review the results achieved
thus far. In 1960 my Government welcomed the establishment 
of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee as a
result of the two-Power agreement in Geneva, and now
welcomes the increase of membership in the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament from eighteen to twenty-six 
members. Although the General Assembly has not yet
been concerned with the election of the members of the
Committee, it is our hope that the increased membership
will be of help in achieving more positive results.

122. We are happy to note the substantial increase of
non-aligned nations represented in this Committee. We
hope that, as suggested, the membership — of its Committee
will rotate on an elective basis in accordance with the
representative character of all major United Nations organs.

123. We welcome the discussions during this session on
chemical and bacteriological weapons and their possible
use. We share the hope of the Secretary-General that
discussions on this important matter will lead to specific
decisions facilitating political and legal action to eliminate
those inhuman and barbarous weapons of war.

124. On the question of the preservation for peaceful
purposes of the sea-bed and ocean floor beyond present
national jurisdiction, Indonesia adheres to the principle of
the common heritage to be used for the common benefit of
mankind. Therefore, the establishment of an international
régime to govern the exploration and exploitation of the
sea-bed and ocean floor beyond national jurisdiction is a
basic step to prevent the use of that area for purposes of
other than humanitarian nature.

125. In this connexion, my delegation would like to stress
the importance of the demilitarization of that area. My
delegation welcomes the idea put forward by the Soviet
Union and the United States before the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. We hope that an
agreement can be reached on the demilitarization of the
sea-bed and ocean floor beyond national jurisdiction.

126. As we are approaching the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, I believe it is very fitting indeed to
reflect on some of its achievements so that we may be able
to adjust the Charter, as well as our activities, in accordance
with the changed circumstances and conditions in the world
today. It is for this reason that my Government attaches
great importance to efforts to relate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations with the question of a
general conference to review the Charter which, in accordance 
with Article 109, has been on the agenda since 1955.

127. Although we can congratulate ourselves on some of
the achievements of our Organization in the past twenty-four 
years, there is little room for complacency. The world
has changed. Science and technology have created new
horizons in man’s lite; man has reached the moon.
Membership of the United Nations has more than doubled
and political systems and attitudes of Member States have
changed. New approaches and platforms have been created
to solve world problems and accelerate the economic and
social development of the world. It is with these changes in
mind that a stock-taking should be made, so that the
achievements of our twenty-five years of labour can be
fully reflected in our Charter. My delegation has in mind
particularly the principles and institutional bodies pertaining 
to the three Ds: development, decolonization and
disarmament.

128. I shall now turn to questions relating to economic
development. The political tensions and conflicts which
frequently preoccupy our attention have come from unresolved 
social and economic inequities. Recognizing this
fact, the Members of the United Nations, in an effort to
remove the roots of poverty and under-development,
launched the First United Nations Development Decade.
Today, as we are approaching the end of this Decade, it is a
matter for serious concern that we have been unable to
achieve even the modest objectives set in 1960.

129. It has been widely accepted that one of the major
factors responsible for the slow rate of development has
been the inadequate contribution of external financing to
assist the developing countries in the mobilization of their
own domestic resources. As a result, these countries have
had to meet their essential requirements for capital equipment 
and raw materials by depending, almost entirely,
upon their export trade earnings. Yet it is precisely in the
field of trade that these countries have been on the losing
end vis-a-vis the developed countries. Not only do they face
grave obstacles in entering the export market, but they have
also been plagued by a continuing decline in the price of
many major primary export commodities including rubber,
coffee, sugar, vegetable oil, cocoa, and so on.

130. In the light of this situation, it is essential that we
should not delay the re-examination of current international 
economic practices designed to meet adequately
the future needs of the developing countries. The developing 
countries themselves realize that they bear the primary
responsibility for the achievement of national development.
They also recognize, however, that they can succeed in
mobilizing and utilizing their domestic resources more
effectively if they are assisted by increased and accelerated
international action. Once again my delegation urges the
international community to intensify its efforts to reach
agreement on policy measures in the main areas of trade
and finance.

131. As regards international co-operation, I wish to state
that the Indonesian delegation is of the opinion that
international action can be better approached through
multilateral co-operation at the regional and sub-regional
levels. Such co-ordination offers greater possibilities for
concrete action through joint undertakings within the wider
scope of an international development strategy. In its
efforts to accelerate progress in this vital area, my Government 
has joined with the neighbouring countries of
Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines to form
ASEAN, the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
Although still in its infancy, we are hopeful that with the
aid and co-operation of other countries and general
international support, the objectives of the initial sponsoring 
members will be realized.

132. No one can deny that the benefits to be derived from
solving the problems of social and economic development
will be shared by all countries of the world and will
contribute greatly to the creation of world prosperity and
international peace and security. We are now on the
threshold of the Second United Nations Development
Decade. This new United Nations Development Decade
differs from the First in that we embark upon it better
prepared. It is my delegation’s fervent hope that the
industrialized nations will join with us in accepting the
challenges of development so that we may enter the new
era, armed with a sense of common purpose and an agreed
plan of action. In this manner the frustrations of the First
United Nations Development Decade may be turned into
the successes of the next.

133. Such international co-operation is particularly important 
to us in Indonesia as we are concentrating our efforts
on the achievement of internal economic and social
development. Three years ago, all of our energy and
resources were being directed towards curtailing the excessively 
high rate of spiralling inflation which plagued our
economy. Such action was necessary before we could
embark on the rehabilitation and further development of
our economy. Having succeeded in this painstaking effort,
last April we launched a five-year development plan which
is the first in a projected series.

134. At this time, our limited domestic resources require
that we take a selective approach. Consequently, we have
placed major emphasis on the development of the agricultural 
sector and on the achievement of self-sufficiency in
the production of food for our population of about 115
million. In view of our limited domestic savings, however,
we are dependent on our export earnings and on external
financial resources, both public and private, bilateral as well
as multilateral. In this connexion, permit me to express
Indonesia’s appreciation of the financial and economic
assistance that has been extended to us by the developed
countries — particularly by the countries which constitute
the Inter-Governmental Group for Indonesia — and by the
United Nations and other multilateral agencies.

135. You may recall that this year my Government
completed the implementation of the last phase of the
Agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands concerning West New Guinea
(West Irian), the most eastern part of my country, signed in
New York seven years ago on 15 August 1962. This last
phase of the Agreement was completed with the exercise of
the act of free choice by the people of West Irian and was
conducted in accordance with its provisions by the Indonesian 
Government, with the advice, assistance and co-operation 
of the United Nations Secretary-General and his
special representative, Ambassador Ortiz Sanz.

136. In Indonesia there has been strong and widespread
opposition, including West Irian itself, against the 
implementation of the act of free choice, since people considered
its implementation contrary to the national sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Indonesia. Despite
this political opposition and the technical difficulties
inherent in an area known to be one of the most primitive
and undeveloped areas of the world, the act of free choice
was completed between 14 July and 2 August last, in a
democratic and orderly way. The people of West Irian,
through their elected members of the consultative
assemblies, have reaffirmed their decision to remain within
the Republic of Indonesia, thus upholding the national
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the Republic.
This positive result has been reported briefly by the
Secretary-General in his introduction to the annual report
on the work of the Organization [A/7601/Add.1]. A
complete report by the Secretary-General on this question
will be submitted to the Assembly during this twenty-fourth session.

137. As rightly stated by President Suharto, more than a
month ago on the eve of 17 August, in his address to the
nation at the commemoration of the anniversary of the
Proclamation of Independence, this result of the act of free
choice in West Irian is, in accordance with Article XXI,
paragraph 2, of the New York Agreement, legally final and
irrevocable and cannot be made void by whomsoever or
whatever pretext.

138. I should like to take this opportunity of conveying
the sincere gratitude of the Indonesian Government and its
people for the invaluable assistance and co-operation of the
Secretary-General and his special representative, Ambassador 
Ortiz Sanz, in completing the implementation of the
New York Agreement. It peacefully terminated a longstanding 
political dispute between two countries, Indonesia
and the Netherlands. We also appreciate the fact that in the
implementation of this important task, my Government has
always had the co-operation and understanding of the
Netherlands Government.

139. The Indonesian Government is now seriously engaged
in the further development of West Irian, not only as a
national duty for the progress of its own people, but as a
task of paramount importance for humanity.

140. In this respect Indonesia is happy to have the full
co-operation of the Netherlands Government which is
prepared to render special financial assistance to a fund,
now under discussion with the Asian Development Bank in
Manila, for the accelerated development in West Irian
within the framework of Indonesia’s five-year development
plan. Needless to say, my Government is ready to welcome
the assistance of all other interested nations, both in and
outside the United Nations.

141. I have now arrived at my concluding remarks. The
year of 1969 will be remembered in that it has offered an
example of precisely how much man can achieve when he is
imbued with a deep sense of dedication towards the
attainment of a desired goal. I refer to the successful
achievement made by science and technology in unveiling
the secrets surrounding outer space and distant celestial
bodies, and especially to the magnificent and daring exploit
which enabled man to set foot on the surface of the moon.
How much greater would be the triumph, however, if such
single-minded and tenacious dedication could be applied to
the solution of the massive problems of peace and security,
of poverty and development, and of the freedom and
dignity of man on earth.

142. Nearly twenty-five years ago, when the world was
still suffering from the devastation of war, mankind began a
collective and commendable effort to start a new life. This
effort was reflected in the United Nations Charter. During
this period we have had successes and failures. Even amid
success, there is continued preoccupation with the United
Nations weaknesses and yet, amid failure, there is continued 
confidence in the United Nations strength.

143. All of us remain dedicated to the common pursuit
of peace, progress and prosperity. The section of the world
population most interested in a true and real peace is
youth, whose very destiny is at stake. We have noted the
restlessness among the young in all parts of the world. It is
they who will inherit the world of tomorrow, and we
believe that appropriate steps should be taken in order to
fulfil their aspirations and to help them adjust to a
progressive world outlook that will benefit from our
accumulated experience and knowledge. In so doing, a gap
between generations can be bridged and the future generation 
can be imbued with a truly constructive spirit. In this
context my delegation supports the idea agreed upon in
principle by the Preparatory Committee for the Twenty-fifth 
Anniversary of the United Nations for supplementing
the forthcoming commemorative session next year with an
assembly of the youth of the world, dedicated to the world
of the United Nations of tomorrow.

144. In conclusion, let me assure the Assembly that
Indonesia will continue to uphold the high principles of the
Charter, and support every endeavour to strengthen the
Organization in its efforts to maintain international peace
and security and to obtain the well-being of people
throughout the world.