1. Madam President, it is
with great pleasure that the Lesotho delegation joins the
delegations which have taken the floor before it in
expressing its congratulations upon your election as President
of the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly.

2. We also wish to take this opportunity of paying tribute
to your predecessor, the late Mr. Arenales, whose untimely
death has deprived not only his country but also this
Organization of his outstanding statesmanship.

3. The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
reaffirms faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small. Therefore, in
assessing the past achievements and failures of the United
Nations, we can justifiably ask how far the world body has
contributed towards the attainment of those noble objectives,
and how far the individual Member States follow the
fundamental principles of the Charter in their dealings with
one another.

4. We, in Lesotho, are as eager as any genuinely peace-loving
nation to promote co-operation and peace in the
world in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
particularly because we believe that the attainment of
human rights and of economic and social development
cannot take place in an atmosphere devoid of peace. This is
a primary consideration in the formulation and implementation
of our domestic and foreign policies. It is
disturbing, however, to note that in our deliberations in this
highest Assembly of Governments and statesmen it is often
too easily forgotten that the end purpose of all our efforts
must be the well-being of individual men and women. We,
in the smaller developing communities, are primarily
concerned not with abstract global concepts or generalizations,
but rather with people and the basic problems of
human existence. It is in this spirit that we join in providing
a reminder of the human realities underlying discussions in
this Assembly.

5. A subject of great concern to us in Lesotho is that of
racialism. We, like all others in this Organization, will yield
to no one in our rejection of discrimination based on race,
colour or religion. We are, therefore, disturbed to note that
in this day and age discriminatory practices have not yet
been completely eradicated in the world. While there are
encouraging signs of genuine efforts on the part of some
countries to come to grips with this problem, it is
disheartening to observe the lack of will and even resistance
in others. We are convinced that the best and, indeed, the
only feasible way of eradicating racialism and discrimination,
and reversing the immense tide of human suffering
which goes with those policies, is by contact and peaceful
negotiation. It is our considered opinion that a negative
attitude of non-co-operation does nobody any good.

6. Our experience has shown that, with determination,
independent States allowing full involvement and harmonious
participation by all men, irrespective of race, can thrive
in Africa. This fact alone makes all the more ridiculous and
dangerous the course of action chosen by the illegal Smith
régime and its followers in Rhodesia of stubbornly denying
the right of African people and their leaders to participate
in a fair and significant way in the government of their
country. It is our sincere hope that the Member States of
this Organization will continue to adhere to the principle of
no independence before majority rule in Rhodesia by denying
the illegal régime the comfort of any recognition while
it pursues its reckless and dangerous policies. We realize
that the mandatory sanctions, which we have supported,
have not had the desired effect on the illegal régime, and so
we urge the strengthening of measures already imposed and
are willing to support any further means to avoid the illegal
situation. However, we would view with serious reservations
any escalation of the sanctions to our region as this would
automatically pose a serious threat to our fledgling economy
and, indeed, our very survival.

7. In spite of the efforts of this Organization to eradicate
colonialism from the face of the earth, Portugal still clings
to the territories of Angola and Mozambique. The assertion
that Portugal’s outmoded colonialist policies in the territories
constitute a threat to international peace and security
has often been viewed with scepticism, but the recent
censure resolution by the Security Council on Portugal for
the latter’s illegal adventures in the territory of a Member
State of this Organization, demonstrates that a real threat
to international peace is inherent in Portugal’s colonial
policies. Moreover, as we have already indicated, we cannot
help but condemn in the strongest terms any form of
government based on racial myths and paternalism.

8. Much as all nations and peoples desire peace, it is
inevitable that differences should arise from time to time in
the conduct of relations between one nation and another or
between groups of nations. Lesotho is firmly committed to
the peaceful settlement. of disputes and is convinced of the
importance of the renunciation of war or threats of war
when differences arise. It is, therefore, disturbing to note
how nations, large and small, are drifting into the practice
of settling differences by the deployment and actual use of
weapons of destruction in utter disregard of the traditional
means of negotiation, mediation or arbitration which this
Organization has always sought to promote. A concomitant
development is the tendency to lose respect for human life
and to ignore the suffering of the victims of war and
violence. Without seeking to apportion blame, it is easy to
note that the casualties of the Viet-Nam war are no longer
regarded as anything more than mere statistics released with
every report on this tragic conflict. Lesotho believes that
the parties to the conflict should intensify their search for a
negotiated settlement in order to prevent further loss of
innocent lives.

9. The importance of the need for negotiated settlement,
either within or outside the framework of the United
Nations, is further stressed by the situation in the Middle
East. The continuation of fighting across the cease-fire
lines, which the Secretary-General has also referred to as
confrontation lines, is ample evidence that the tensions in
the area cannot be permanently solved through a military
victory by one side over the other. We reiterate our
conviction that lasting peace can only come as a product of
negotiations based on the honest recognition of political
realities. That Israel is a political fact cannot be contested.
That it has the right to transform occupation, based on
force, into legal annexation must be denied. Israel must,
however, have the assurance that it can continue to exist
without fear of attack. It must also be assured of secure and
recognized boundaries. Lesotho hopes that Israel and its
Arab neighbours will bear in mind the serious plight of their
populations who must live under the cloud of war until a
permanent settlement is found. It should, however, be
pointed out that the reaching of a permanent settlement
has not been allowed to lie entirely within the discretion of
the parties to the conflict. Interference by the big Powers
has delayed the realization of this goal. It is to be hoped
that these Powers will realize the futility of their intervention
and will co-operate with this Organization in urging the
parties to the conflict to reach a negotiated settlement
based on mutual trust.

10. The Nigerian crisis is not only a blot on Africa’s image,
but a challenge to man’s conscience. We urge Members of
this Organization to view with sympathy and concern the
losses which this great African nation has already suffered
and to desist from actions which may aggravate the
situation. Since we believe in the territorial integrity of
Member States, we condemn tribalism, secession and
persecution of minorities, all of which are disturbing forces.
A united and peaceful Nigeria can contribute no end to
Africa’s progress.

11. We reaffirm our belief in complete disarmament. We
note with alarm and concern the development of new and
more sophisticated weapons of war, especially bigger
nuclear devices and items of gas and germ warfare which,
by their very nature, pose a threat to the entire human race.
We hope, therefore, that the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament, as it continues its efforts to draft a treaty
on general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, will meet with some success.

12. The close relationship between disarmament and
economic development has long been acknowledged. Our
interest in disarmament is therefore also due to the belief
that a substantial part of the resources derived from a
reduction in military expenditure could be channelled to
projects of social and economic development in all countries.

13. Lesotho’s stand on the question of the admission of
the People’s Republic of China into this Organization has
not changed. Whatever solution is ultimately found, it
should not be at the cost of the membership of the
Republic of China. Our unequivocal stand is that any
decision which would bar the participation of the representatives
of the Republic of China in this, or any other organ
of the United Nations, would be unjust and totally
unworthy of this Organization in its dealing with Member
States. The Republic of China has fully demonstrated its
right not only to exist as a sovereign independent State, but
also to participate constructively in world affairs.

14. On the question of a divided Korea, the delegation of
Lesotho reaffirms its support for the efforts of all parties to
find a solution for that situation within the framework of
the United Nations Commission for the Unification and
Rehabilitation of Korea. The Government of Lesotho,
therefore, urges all parties to recognize the legitimate role
of the United Nations in this peace-keeping and arbitration
effort in order that the door towards a solution to this
long-standing problem may be opened. We are amazed that
the Government of North Korea, which claims popular
support, should be so reluctant to co-operate with the
appropriate United Nations organ. This seems to be an
example of politicians putting their own interests above
those of the people they claim to serve.

15. Before leaving the subject of political strife, I wish to
allude to certain disturbing situations which are a challenge
to this Organization. Uppermost among these is the
question of a divided Germany. The dismembering of
nations for purely ideological reasons does not contribute
to permanent peace. The military occupation of Czechoslovakia
and subsequent interference in its internal affairs
by the Warsaw Pact countries is still very fresh in our
memories and evokes uphappy memories of what happened
to Hungary in 1956. The situation in Northern Ireland,
where incidentally the British Government seems to have
departed from its declared stand against the use or show of
force, is a clear demonstration of the dangers inherent in
any form of discrimination and intolerance. Finally, a new
phenomenon which, if allowed to go unchecked, would
usher in a new era of terror in our already troubled world.
Here I am referring to the hijacking of aircraft by
irresponsible individuals and groups which have shown
criminal disregard for international law and order. We think
it is time the international community took action to
protect itself.

16. There is a great deal the United Nations can do to
assist in the advancement of developing countries but,
needless to say, success or failure depends largely on the
will and the determination of the advanced Members of the
Organization, which are able to make substantial contributions
in cash or kind. The Lesotho Government is aware of
the serious lack of trained manpower in technical skills and
development which adversely affects the economic growth
of many countries, including those richly endowed with
natural resources. Hence our appreciation of the valuable
professional and technical assistance given by the United
Nations Development Programme and the numerous
specialized agencies of the United Nations. In our own
small way, we shall continue to contribute regularly to the
resources of the United Nations and its agencies.

17. During the First United Nations Development Decade
we have noted with disappointment the slow progress made
in the promotion of world trade. Experience has shown
that the goals set and the problems encountered called for
far more determination and closer co-operation than most
Members of this Organization were prepared to give. It is
not charity that the developing countries are asking for, but
rather a readjustment of the terms of trade and aid in such
a way as to bring prosperity to all. Here again, the advanced
countries have it in their power to redress or aggravate the
situation. This is a matter for action and not merely good
intentions and pious resolutions.

18. My Government is conscious of the major responsibility
of the United Nations in the development of
international law in our contemporary world. We feel that
all the major changes which have taken place in the world
during the past two decades should be accommodated
within the framework of legal relations. That task is
rendered more urgent by the tendency of some States to
take unilateral decisions for purely domestic reasons without
regard to commitments previously entered into, and
without regard to the significance of the relevant provisions
of the Charter to which we all subscribe. If there is to be
international justice, it can only be within the framework
of international law. That is why we attach so much
importance to the outcome of the recent United Nations
Conference on the Law of Treaties, in which we participated.
As a land-locked country completely surrounded by
South Africa, our nearest neighbour, we are deeply interested
in the development of international law with respect
to land-locked States. We hope that the efforts to minimize
and finally eliminate the problems of land-locked States
will continue. For us this is not a matter of politics only
but rather of facing the realities of our geographical
situation, which is unique, and which we ask our friends to
try to understand.

19. As a small nation, we continue to put our hopes in the
United Nations and wish to reaffirm our belief in the goals
set forth in its Charter. We believe that this Organization
has it in its power, as the most comprehensive forum of
world opinion, to arrest the dangerous course of events to
which we have already referred. Unless we make a
concerted effort to eradicate, once and for all, the evils of
sectionalism, intolerance and selfishness, our world is
doomed to extinction. It is well to remember a hackneyed
expression, “Those whom the gods wish to destroy, they
first make mad”.