22. Madam President, distinguished Secretary-General, it is
indeed a great pleasure for me, on behalf of the delegation
of the Mongolian People’s Republic, warmly to congratulate
you as a representative of the great African continent
on your election to the office of President of the
twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly, and to wish
you success in carrying out the noble and responsible tasks
that have been entrusted to you.

23. The present world situation is marked by a struggle
between the forces of reaction and war, which are
noticeably intensifying their intrigues in various parts of the
world, and the forces of revolution and progress, headed by
the socialist community, which are consistently furthering
the cause of peace, democracy, national independence and
social progress. The peace-loving forces are doing everything
in their power to avert the threat of a new world war.

24. No appreciable improvement in the international
situation has been observed since the last session of the
General Assembly. Indeed, the world situation has deteriorated
considerably, owing to the aggressive policy of
imperialism. The threat to universal peace and the security
of nations has not yet been averted but, on the contrary,
has become graver. This is clearly confirmed by the
situation in South-East Asia and the Middle East, which
threatens world peace and security. This is also shown by
the recent alarming developments in Central Europe and in
certain other parts of the world.

25. In defining the objective and methods of imperialist
policy, Mr. Y. Tsedenbal, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the Mongolian People’s Republic, said in his
statement at the Moscow Conference of Communist and
Workers’ Parties on 13 June 1969:

“Resorting to the widest variety of means, including
provocation, counter-revolutionary conspiracy, reactionary
uprisings and armed intervention, imperialism is
trying to impose its policy on the peoples of the world by
force and artificiality to maintain constant tension in
international relations.”

26. The serious situation which now prevails makes it
urgently necessary for the United Nations to take really
practical measures on problems which are vitally important
for the future of the world and of mankind, such as the
strengthening of international security, development of
friendly co-operation between countries and peoples, the
final eradication of the vestiges of colonialism, the prompt
suppression of the intrigues of neo-colonialism, militarism
and neo-nazism, and general and complete disarmament. In
this connexion the delegation of the Mongolian People’s
Republic supports the new initiative taken by the Government
of the Soviet Union providing for a series of
constructive measures to strengthen international security,
and advocates the adoption by this session of the General
Assembly of the appeal to all States of the world, the draft
of which was introduced by Mr. A. A. Gromyko, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, on 19 September this year [A/7654]. Once
again the Soviet Union has drawn the attention of the
General Assembly and the world to the central problem of
modern international life.

27. As the representative of an Asian socialist country
which consistently pursues a policy of peace and co-operation
based on equal rights and good neighbourliness
towards the countries of this region and towards all States,
I should like to dwell in somewhat greater detail on the
situation in Asia and the Far East.

28. The problem of maintaining peace in Asia has always
been a matter of great concern to all peace-loving forces
and, above all, to the peoples of Asia. This is perfectly
comprehensible. The peoples of the Asian countries need a
stable peace which would ensure favourable conditions for
consolidation of their independence, achieved after a long
struggle, and for improvement of living conditions, elimination
of the harmful consequences of colonial rule, and
attainment of social and economic progress. It is perfectly
clear that the future of world peace largely depends on
whether or not peace is maintained in Asia.

29. Nevertheless, the situation in that part of the world is
marked by chronic instability and increasing tension.

30. The United States of America, in flagrant violation of
the Geneva Agreements on Viet-Nam, continues to wage a
bloody colonial war against the people of Viet-Nam, which
is being compelled to use armed force in defence of the
freedom, independence and unity of its country.

31. The courage and determination of the people of
Viet-Nam in its struggle against the most powerful imperialist 
Power, the United States of America, are an inspiring
example to peoples battling for freedom and national
independence and against colonialist and imperialist enslavement.

32. At the Paris negotiations the United States side is
resorting to all kinds of delaying tactics and is rejecting the
constructive proposals of the representatives of the Democratic 
Republic of Viet-Nam and the Provisional Revolutionary 
Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
directed towards the political settlement of the Viet-Nam
problem. The Nixon Government, by deliberately drawing
out the Paris negotiations and representing as a peaceful
gesture the withdrawal of a negligible part of its troops
from South Viet-Nam, is trying to delude world public
opinion and to gain time in order to continue its barbarous
aggression. That is also the purpose served by the so-called
new Asian policy of the United States of America, so
widely publicized of late, which in fact represents nothing
but an attempt to legalize the “United States presence” in
Asia, to strengthen the tottering position of the puppet
regime in Saigon and similar regimes, and to strengthen the
role of the Asian military establishment in the struggle
against the national liberation movement in Asia.

33. Basic prerequisites for a political settlement of the
Viet-Nam problem are cessation of United States aggression, 
unconditional withdrawal of the troops of the
interventionists and their henchmen from South Viet-Nam,
and an opportunity for the people of Viet-Nam to decide
its future for itself without external interference. The
problem can be solved only through unconditional recognition 
of the inalienable rights of the people of Viet-Nam.

34. The legitimate claims of the people of Viet-Nam are
clearly expressed in the unswerving, position of the Government 
of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and in the
comprehensive programme of the National Liberation
Front of South Viet-Nam and the Provisional Revolutionary 
Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam,
which enjoys great authority among the people of Viet-Nam 
and wide support from world public opinion, the
proof of which is that it is already recognized by more than
twenty States.

35. The Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic
resolutely supports the just and constructive proposals of
fighting Viet-Nam. The Government of the Mongolian
People’s Republic and the Mongolian people have stood and
will stand firmly beside their brothers the people of
Viet-Nam and will continue to give them all possible
assistance in their struggle for peace in South-East Asia and
throughout the world against United States aggression.

36. United States aggression in Viet-Nam directly threatened 
the freedom and independence of the peoples of Asia
and particularly the national sovereignty, territorial integrity 
and security of the neighbouring countries of Laos
and Cambodia. Accordingly, consistent support of the
heroic and just struggle of the people of Viet-Nam serves
the vital cause of the defence and consolidation of the
independence and sovereignty of the countries of Asia. Any
assistance to United States aggression runs counter to these interests.

37. The Korean peninsula continues to be one of the
sources of international tension. This is confirmed by the
unceasing provocation of the United States Seoul side
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in the
form of practically daily violations of the demarcation line
and the systematic penetration of United States intelligence
vessels and aircraft into its territorial waters and air space.
The situation is further aggravated by the fact that the
United States, having turned South Korea into a military
and strategic strongpoint for carrying out its aggressive
plans, is increasing its military power in South Korea, is
introducing large quantities of the most modern types of
weapons, and is forcing the South Korean army to rearm.

38. In order to eliminate this dangerous source of tension
and to give the Korean people an opportunity to settle its
domestic affairs without any interference from outside, it is
essential to bring about the immediate withdrawal from
South Korea of the United States occupation troops, whose
presence is unlawfully concealed behind the flag of our
Organization.

39. As we all know, the question of the withdrawal of
foreign troops from South Korea is on the agenda of the
General Assembly. By adopting a positive decision on this
question, the General Assembly will render a valuable
service to the Korean people and to the cause of peace in
the Far East.

40. The Mongolian People’s Republic maintains the most
cordial relations with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, which is going through a stage of vigorous economic
and cultural development, and greatly appreciates the
untiring and constructive efforts of its Government for its
peaceful unification on a .democratic basis and for the
maintenance of peace in that part of the world.

41. In speaking of the situation in Asia, we cannot ignore
the threat presented by the so-called security treaties
concluded by certain Asian countries with the United
States of America, or the existence of such aggressive
military blocs as SEATO [South-East Asia Treaty Organization] 
and ANZUS [Security Treaty between Australia, New
Zealand and the United States of America], which are
directed against the socialist countries, against independent
peace-loving States and against national liberation movements 
in Asia. It is well known that intensive preparations
are now under way for forging yet another aggressive bloc,
PATO [Pacific-Asian Treaty Organization].

42. In addition, the noticeable strengthening of the
military and political alliance between the United States of
America and Japan and the increasing Japanese militarization 
are causing legitimate concern to the peoples of Asia,
which have often in the past been the victims of Japanese
aggression; they include the Mongolian people, who have
recently observed the thirtieth anniversary of their victory
on the river Khalkin-Gol over the Japanese invaders who
had attempted to undermine our country’s independence
and revolutionary achievements. The Japanese invasion was
a kind of prelude to the Second World War. As you know,
on the very day after the defeat of the Japanese forces at
Khalkin-Gok, that is to say on 1 September 1939, the most
destructive war in history began with Nazi Germany’s
attack on Poland.

43. Another serious threat to security in Asia and the Far
East is the de facto occupation of vast areas of the Pacific
and Indian oceans by United States armed forces.
44. Thus the dangerous situation now prevailing in Asia
gives us serious food for thought on how peace can be
maintained and ensured in this enormous area of the world.

45. Accordingly, the Government of the Mongolian People’s 
Republic warmly welcomes and supports the idea of
establishing a system of collective security in Asia, an idea
which is dictated by the actual course of events and finds
sympathy and support in many countries.

46. Only a system of collective security embracing the
whole continent, not narrow military and political groupings 
under the aegis of foreign aggressive forces, can give the
peoples of the region an opportunity of finding better
solutions, under conditions of political independence and
lasting peace, for the vast social and economic problems
with which they are confronted. Such a system would
ensure peaceful and mutually advantageous co-operation,
on a basis of equal rights, between the participating States.
It would be an obstacle to any increase in the influence of
imperialist, colonial and expansionist circles in the region
and a stabilizing factor in Asia and throughout the world.

47. The Government and people of our country continue
to follow with close attention the development of events in
the Middle East, and consider that an immediate political
settlement in that region is one of the important conditions
for the alleviation of international tension and for the
defence of peace against a large-scale military conflict.

48. The extremist ruling circles at Tel Aviv, openly
flouting repeated United Nations decisions and the whole
world’s clearly expressed demands, are violating the cease-fire 
agreement and escalating their aggression against the
Arab States, thus aggravating an already explosive situation.

49. The Israeli aggressors have set themselves the goal of
preventing a political settlement of the Middle East crisis
and are trying to impose their expansionist conditions in
the interests of imperialism and neo-colonialism.

50. Many speakers here have quite rightly emphasized that
the Tel Aviv rulers, in their defiant behaviour and adventurism, 
are relying on the direct aid and support of
influential imperialist circles of the United States, Western
Germany and certain Western Powers which take a hostile
neo-colonialist attitude towards the independent Arab States.

51. The Mongolian delegation considers that those who
stand behind Israel should bear the responsibility for delay
in reaching a Middle East settlement. The cause of the
peace and security of nations urgently requires the rapid
adoption of decisive measures, both within and outside the
United Nations, to compel the Israeli invaders to implement
the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
[242 (1967)] and to abandon their present dangerous
course, which is fraught with serious consequences for all
nations.

52. The question of European security occupies an important 
place in the strengthening of the peace and security of nations.

53. The military and political alliance between the United
States and the Federal Republic of Germany and the
activation of the aggressive NATO bloc are a serious threat
to peace in Europe and throughout the world.

54. The openly revanchist and expansionist policy of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, and its
support of militarist and neo-nazi forces in the country,
cannot fail to arouse profound concern among the peoples.
The line taken by the Government of the Federal Republic
of Germany that it is the sole representative of all
Germany, its unlawful encroachment on West Berlin, and
Bonn’s aspirations to the possession of nuclear weapons — all
this is directed towards undermining the foundations of
peace in Europe.

55. A prerequisite for ensuring European security is
recognition of the incontrovertible fact of the existence on
German soil of two sovereign States, the German Democratic 
Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, and
recognition of the existing frontiers, especially the Oder-Neisse 
line and the frontier between the two German States.

56. In this connexion the delegation of the Mongolian
People’s Republic would like to lay special stress on the
great contribution which the German Democratic Republic,
as an important factor of peace, is making to the cause of
strengthening security in Europe. The actively peaceful
policy of the socialist German Democratic Republic, whose
glorious twentieth anniversary will be celebrated in a few
days’ time enjoys great authority on the international
scene. This is convincingly illustrated by the fact that a
number of Asian and African States have recently established 
diplomatic relations with the German Democratic Republic.

57. We should like to reiterate once again that the United
Nations should comply with the request of the German
Democratic Republic, which long ago informed the Organization 
of its wish to become a Member. The consistent
adherence of the German Democratic Republic to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations, its untiring
struggle for peace and security and the continuing growth
of its economic potential are eloquent proof that it would
become an active and effective Member of our Organization.

58. The Mongolian delegation wishes to state unequivocally 
that the discrimination which is being exercised
against the German Democratic Republic with regard to
granting it observer status in the United Nations and the
tight to participate in the Organization’s various commissions 
and committees is not only a shortsighted attitude but
also a dangerous concession to the policy of those forces
which are using devious means to introduce the Federal
Republic of Germany, with its expansionist policy towards
the developing countries, into various United Nations institutions.

59. The Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic
welcomed the Budapest appeal by the States parties to the
Warsaw Treaty to all European countries concerning the
convening of an all-European conference on problems of
security and co-operation. This important proposal by the
socialist countries is gaining ever-increasing support.

60. We are profoundly convinced that peaceful co-operation 
between the European States is the only realistic
alternative to the dangerous military confrontation, to the
arms race and to the disputes imposed upon Europe by
aggressive forces seeking to review the consequences of the
Second World War and to recarve the map of Europe. In
our opinion the creation of a stable system of security in
Europe would also promote the creation of other regional
collective-security systems, particularly in Asia.

61. Despite the limited success recently achieved in partial
disarmament measures, the world arms race, especially in
nuclear weapons, is accelerating. No progress is being made
in the settlement of such vitally important problems as the
prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, their limitation
and the subsequent destruction of stockpiles of such weapons.

62. The problem of ending underground tests of nuclear
weapons, and other measures to limit the race in these
weapons of mass destruction, are still urgently awaiting
solution. The Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in three
environments is not being universally observed. That
important instrument, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons [General Assembly resolution
2372 (XXII)], has not yet entered into force and has not
yet been signed by a number of nuclear and potential
nuclear States.

63. All this arouses. legitimate anxiety among the peoples,
which look to the United Nations for further efforts to
promote success in the negotiations on general and complete 
disarmament and to take effective partial measures to
avert the threat of thermo-nuclear catastrophe. The world
expects the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
at Geneva to produce specific and positive results on the
questions which it is discussing.

64. The Mongolian People’s Republic, which has recently
become a member of the Committee on Disarmament, is
continuing its endeavours to contribute to the cause of
disarmament and the strengthening of international security.

65. Evidence of this is to be found, in particular, in the
fact that the Mongolian People’s Republic is a co-sponsor of
the draft convention on the prohibition of the development, 
production and stockpiling of chemical and bacteriological 
(biological) weapons and on the destruction of
such weapons [A/7655] which has been submitted for
consideration at this session of the General Assembly.

66. Our delegation is convinced that this proposal, which
is motivated by a genuine concern to save mankind from
the horrors of a chemical and bacteriological war, will be
supported by the States Members of the United Nations. In
our opinion the General Assembly would make a substantial 
contribution to the cause of disarmament and the
cause of maintaining world peace by adopting the draft
convention on the prohibition of the development, production 
and stockpiling of chemical and bacteriological (biological) 
weapons and on the destruction of such weapons.

67. The conclusion of such a convention would expand
and strengthen the Geneva Protocol of 1925, which has
been, and still is, a highly important instrument of
international law for prohibition of the use in war of
chemical and bacteriological weapons, those dangerous
means of mass destruction of human life.

68. Now that, in certain countries, particularly in the
United States and Western Germany, intensive work is
being done on developing and stockpiling chemical and
bacteriological weapons and monstrous plans are being
made for their use “in case of war“, it is an urgent task to
ensure strict observance of the Geneva Protocol by all
States without exception. Accordingly the delegation of the
Mongolian People’s Republic to the Committee on Disarmament 
submitted a proposal that the General Assembly
should immediately address an appeal to all Governments
which have not yet done so to accede to the Protocol or to
ratify it during 1970, to mark the forty-fifth anniversary of
the signature of this historic instrument and the twenty-fifth 
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
Our delegation hopes that this proposal, which was supported 
by a number of delegations in the Committee — and
we should like to express our gratitude to them — will also
meet with a favourable response and support at this session
of the General Assembly.

69. Our delegation has taken those steps because of its
sincere desire to support the important conclusions and
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations on chemical and bacteriological 
(biological) weapons and the effects of their possible use.

70. Life insistently demands untiring work to limit the
arms race and take effective partial measures of disarmament, 
as well as the settlement of such problems as the
peaceful use of the sea-bed and the ocean floor, the removal
of foreign military bases from the territories of other States
and the creation of nuclear-free zones in various continents
of the world.

71. Our delegation hopes that the Committee on Disarmament, 
which is now concentrating its attention on the
problem of prohibiting the use of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor for military purposes, will achieve practical results
contributing to a positive solution of this important problem.

72. The Mongolian People’s Republic is prepared to
continue its active co-operation with all States, both in the
General Assembly and in the Committee on Disarmament,
for the solution of the cardinal problem of our time, that of
disarmament.

73. In 1970 the workers of the world will celebrate the
centenary of the birth of V.I. Lenin, that consistent
champion of the right of oppressed peoples to self-determination, 
that great thinker, the founder of the
world’s first socialist State and the leader of the October
Revolution, which heralded the era of the true liberation of peoples.

74. It is significant that during the same year the United
Nations will be celebrating the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence 
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which reflects
the noble ideas of national self-determination, full equality
and the social progress of nations, and will be assessing the
progress made in the implementation of this historic document.

75. As a result of the rapid expansion of the national
liberation movement among colonial peoples and of the
efforts made by the United Nations, the socialist countries
and the newly independent States of Asia and Africa, a
large number of former colonies and dependent countries
have recently attained independence.

76. Nevertheless, the Declaration has not yet been fully
implemented. Tens of millions of human beings are still
under the colonial and racist yoke.

77. A particularly dangerous situation has developed in
southern Africa, where the alliance between the racist
régimes in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia and the
Portuguese colonialists has turned this part of the African
continent into a bastion of the colonial and racist order.

78. In an attempt to retain their colonial possessions in
Africa by force, the Portuguese colonialists are waging a
bloody war against the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau), with the economic and military assistance
of the NATO countries. The racist regime in South Africa,
in addition to intensifying its policy of apartheid against
the indigenous population of the country, is stubbornly
pursuing the same inhuman policy against the people of
Namibia, in flagrant violation of resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. The illegal regime of
the white minority in Southern Rhodesia has not only not
been overthrown but is becoming more firmly entrenched.
With the direct connivance of the Government of the
United Kingdom, the Salisbury regime has adopted a racist
constitution depriving the people of Zimbabwe of their
fundamental rights and has thus obtained a free hand for
the open establishment of a racist State similar to that of
the Republic of South Africa.

79. The maintenance of colonialism and racism runs
counter to the high purposes and principles of the United
Nations and constitutes a threat to world peace.

80. The United Nations should take resolute and practical
steps to achieve the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and of other decisions of the United Nations on
this subject.

81. Our delegation believes that the time has come for the
United Nations to come to grips with the problem of
neo-colonialism and to develop specific measures which can
help the newly independent States to combat this evil. The
policy of neo-colonialism being pursued by imperialist
circles constitutes a grave danger to the political independence 
and sovereignty of the developing countries and
hinders their attainment of economic independence and 
social progress.

82. The part which the United Nations is called upon to
play in the development of the economics of new States
must be regarded as directly connected with the struggle
against neo-colonialism. In order to enhance the effectiveness 
of the economic activities of the United Nations, the
results of the implementation of earlier decisions and in
particular the reasons for the failure of the First Development 
Decade must be taken into account in planning
further measures in this sphere. We believe that the
programme of the Second Development Decade should be
planned primarily to further the interests of the developing
countries and to promote the attainment of their economic
independence and the strengthening of the government
sector. It is also important that the programme of action
should be based on their national development plans.

83. Where international conditions are concerned, the
Second Development Decade cannot promise realistic effects 
unless the forms and methods of trade and economic
relations between the Western and the developing countries
are radically changed, that is to say, unless the plundering
of the newly independent States by the monopolies of the
developed capitalist countries is brought to an end. It is
essential to carry on a relentless struggle against the
attempts of the capitalist Powers to evade their historic
responsibility for the wretched situation of the former
colonial countries.

84. The Mongolian People’s Republic will support any
measures which will genuinely promote the economic and
social advancement of the developing countries and the
expansion of mutually advantageous co-operation between States.

85. In 1970, the United Nations will celebrate a highly
significant occasion, the twenty-fifth anniversary of its
establishment.

86. The peoples of the world expect the United Nations,
which is called upon to save mankind from the threat of
war, to mark this anniversary with positive achievements to
its credit. This can be done, and there is enough time to do so.

87. As before, the Mongolian People’s Republic advocates
the strengthening of the United Nations as an instrument of
peace and international co-operation and will actively
support any steps it may take for the maintenance of world
peace and the strengthening of mutual understanding
among nations in accordance with its Charter. Moreover, we
believe that the Charter still contains a wide range of
possibilities for such action. We are in favour of unswerving
observance of the Charter. Only through strict observance
of its Charter can the United Nations achieve effective
solutions of the urgent problems with which it is con-
fronted. That is why we resolutely oppose the attempts of
some circles to review the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter, under various pretexts, including
that of the forthcoming anniversary.

88. Respect for the principle of universality is extremely
important. In connexion with the forthcoming twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, we propose that the
doors of the Organization should be opened to all States
expressing a desire to become Members.

89. In conclusion, on behalf of the Government of the
Mongolian People’s Republic, I should like to wish the
twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly success in
solving the urgent problems of the day in the interests of
peace and international security.