163. May I, Mr. President, express the satisfaction
felt in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania at the expression
of confidence and admiration that the entire membership
of the United Nations has extended to Miss Brooks,
representative of Liberia, by electing her to the Presidency
of the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly?
That honour, which is highly appreciated by all Africans, is
above all a well-deserved tribute to the outstanding qualities
that are known to all who have had the privilege of
observing how Miss Brooks has discharged her important duties.

164. Her election to this high office also testifies to the
deep respect that the international community feels for the
oldest republic of Africa, its great people and its 
distinguished President. Her brilliant and well-deserved success
will contribute to the rehabilitation of African women by
highlighting the decisive part that they can play, with
dignity and efficiency, in the task of building and consolidating 
African nations and societies. This is an important
factor, and Miss Brooks, through her sense of proportion
and her great human qualities, has contributed greatly to its
emergence and acceptance. My delegation conveys to her its
warmest congratulations, and wishes to assure her of its full
and loyal co-operation.

165. My delegation also wishes to associate itself with the
unanimous tribute paid from this rostrum to the courage
and devotion displayed by the President of the twenty-third
session, His Excellency Mr. Emilio Arenales, in braving the
great suffering of a disease which in the end removed him
prematurely from our midst. My delegation pays a respectful 
tribute to the memory of this great son of Latin
America, and wishes to convey to the people and to the
Republic of Guatemala our brotherly feelings of deep
sadness at the loss of his outstanding personality.

166. The twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly is
meeting at a moment particularly fraught with danger for
world peace and security. After its 24 years of existence
our Organization has not yet succeeded in converting into
reality the noble ideals that presided at its establishment
and are enshrined in the Charter.

167. The worsening of the international situation, touched
on by U Thant in the introduction to his annual report on
the work of the Organization [A/7601/Add.1], is a
disturbing development, viewed with deep concern by
peoples and nations.

168. What President Pazhwak, at the time of his election
as President of the General Assembly for its twenty-first
session, described as the “forces of evil“ defiantly continue
their sinister activities in disregard of the fundamental 
principles of the Charter of our Organization.

169. Senseless colonial wars are still being waged in 
various parts of Africa and Asia, continents which international 
imperialism chooses as the site of its centres of 
struggle for influence and as hotbeds of war.

170. The major part of southern Africa is bent under the 
yoke of violence by a coalition of contemptibly selfish
interests which binds the supporters of the system of 
apartheid of Pretoria and Salisbury and the decadent
colonialists of Portugal with a whole powerful group of 
selfish and short-sighted interests to which most of the
Western countries, and particularly the members of NATO,
are directly committed.

171. Zionist troops, with unconcealed approval from
certain quarters, continue to occupy with impunity vast 
territories of countries victims of a dastardly aggression that
has been condemned with indignation by all those who, in 
the interests of the maintenance of peace and understanding 
among peoples, want the continuation of the 
United Nations and hence the translation into reality of the 
principles of peace, justice, equality, territorial integrity of 
States, non-interference in their domestic affairs and 
absolute respect for their sovereignty — the fundamental 
principles that are the framework and the very essence of 
the world Organization.

172. The greatest Power in the world today obstinately
continues to wage unsuccessfully an unjust war, thereby
imposing great hardship and considerable material loss upon
an entire people whose only crime is a wish to exercise, in 
the freedom and respect to which it is entitled from all, the 
tight to choose its own destiny in all freedom, without any
foreign intervention.

173. The principle of the universality of the Organization
is still deliberately and flagrantly violated by the refusal to 
restore the legitimate rights of one of the greatest Powers of 
our time.

174. The division of the Korean people is being continued
under the shadow of the tragic and dangerous fiction 
represented by the so-called Commission for the Unification 
and Rehabilitation of Korea and by the use of the
United Nations flag as a cover for the maintenance of 
foreign troops in that divided country against the will of 
the majority of its inhabitants.

175. In other areas of the world, peoples are being
deprived of their sacred right freely to choose their own 
destinies and to develop in accordance with their own
aspirations and convictions.

176. On the socio-economic plane, we are all aware of the
dangerous imbalance created by the widening gap which
divides the world into well-endowed and under-developed
countries. The absence in the developed countries of the
indispensable political will to change this deplorable state
of affairs, which was already noted during the proceedings
of the second session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, was once again emphasized by
the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual
report on the work of the Organization.

177. These are matters of serious concern for the people 
and Government of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, as
indeed they are for all peoples and Governments that care
for peace and justice and are genuinely interested in the
consolidation of international security.

178. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania, as a small
country of the under-developed world, has every reason to
be deeply conscious of the need to maintain peace, stability
and harmony among peoples. It is our realization of this
profound truth that has led us to make the basic choice in
favour of non-alignment, the corner-stone of the foreign
policy defined by the Mauritanian People’s Party and
applied by the Government of the Islamic Republic of 
Mauritania. It was this policy that our Head of State set
forth in the following terms in a report on the state of the
nation submitted to our National Assembly on 28 November 1968:

“Determined fully to play the role devolving upon it in
Africa, refusing to follow a policy of hegemony in any
form, our country is continuing its march as part of the
international community with the firm determination to 
strive to bring about in this troubled world the rule of
peace, concord and unity among peoples.”

179. As we see it, this policy of non-alignment which the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania follows both in the African
continent and outside Africa in no way precludes fruitful 
consultations and co-operation between our country and
any State, whether a neighbour of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania or not. Such consultations and such co-operation, 
in a climate of mutual trust, can lead to agreements
concluded with due regard for the interests of each of the
parties, or to the emergence of a mutual stand based on a
common destiny or on any other valid and legitimate
grounds. Our country will loyally observe such commitments, 
and in so doing will prove faithful to itself and to 
the sense of dignity and honour that is characteristic of our
people. This constitutes beyond question an important and
stable factor in the pursuit and maintenance of peace and in 
the struggle against under-development. 

180. The Government and the responsible political leaders
of our country will never lose sight of the duty imposed
upon them by the geographical position of Mauritania and
by the cultural and ethnical composition of its population.
This fundamental idea has been repeated more than once
by the Head of our State, who, in addressing the third 
congress of the Mauritanian People’s Party in January 1968, said:

“Mauritania is by vocation a worker for African unity. 
It links white with black Africa, and is both African and
Arab. Its twin histories and cultures have never faced it
with a choice but have always united to uphold it.”

181. This statement clearly indicates that our chief ambition 
has always been to represent an element of stability 
and concord in our geographical region, and thus to
contribute to the maintenance of peace and understanding
among its peoples. The attainment of these objectives,
which are consistently and resolutely pursued by the 
Government and people of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, 
will serve, we are convinced, the genuine interests of 
the African continent.

182. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania, as a militant
member of the Organization of African Unity, fully
supports all our brother countries in Africa in the face of all
the difficulties which they may encounter on their way to
the consolidation of their independence and unity.

183. I have already had an opportunity to state from this
rostrum [1690th meeting] what my Government and
people think about the painful conflict that has been raging
in Nigeria for over two years. I should like now once again
to emphasize that we in Mauritania are convinced that the
interests of all Nigerians and of Africa as a whole lies above
everything else in the preservation and maintenance of
Nigeria’s territorial integrity. Starting from this fundamental 
premise, we consider that the parties to this 
fratricidal war have a duty to seek, through negotiation, the
best means of ensuring that all the communities constituting 
the people of Nigeria feel secure and fully enjoy all
rights and opportunities for development compatible with
respect for the territorial integrity of the country.

184. it is our duty in this Organization to denounce the
activities of those who, by means of violence and a certain
propaganda of incitement, are still trying to dismember the
Federation of Nigeria.

185. We venture to hope that all States Members of our
Organization will join their efforts to those of the Organization 
of African Unity to help in bringing peace to that 
country. It is gratifying to note the goodwill that the
Federal Government of Nigeria has always shown both in
the United Nations and in the Organization of African 
Unity in connexion with the efforts constantly being
exerted to restore peace and to ensure the security of all
citizens. When the secessionists give up their mad attempt
at division, it will be possible for the Nigerian people, in a
climate of restored peace and unity, to choose the structure
that will best meet the wishes of all the component
elements of that great people.

186. On the question of decolonization, it is appalling to
observe that after 24 years of effort the United Nations has
still not succeeded in putting an end to colonialism. It
would not, however, be fair to ignore certain positive
results obtained by the Organization in this field by means
of those efforts.

187. In this connexion it is encouraging to note that
Spain, after permitting Equatorial Guinea to accede to
independence, has proceeded to restore the Ifni enclave to
Morocco. This evidence of Spanish goodwill entitles us to
hope that, as to that portion of the Sahara which is still
under colonial domination — a territory of particular interest
to my country — the administering Power will apply the
relevant decisions of this Organization. To do so would
strengthen still further the ties of friendship and co-operation 
which unite the countries of that region, in particular
the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, to Spain and the
Spanish people, for whom we feel both admiration and esteem.

188. The people and Government of the Islamic Republic 
of Mauritania, who are deeply anti-colonialist and 
anti-imperialist, are witnessing with concern the state of
impotence in which the racist minorities who, like the
Zionist authorities of Tel Aviv, hold the abject doctrine of
apartheid are keeping our Organization.

189. The Mauritanian people, their Party and their Government 
propose once again to reaffirm their active support
for their brother peoples resolutely struggling in Angola,
Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau), Zimbabwe, Namibia and
South Africa to regain their independence and enforce
respect for their dignity and their fundamental rights as free men.

190. Without the assistance extended by the supporters of
apartheid and by certain Western Powers, it would have
been much more difficult for the Portuguese oppressors to
continue to wage a criminal colonial war, which is too
remote and costly for a country whose scanty resources
rank it among the poorest in the world. We should like to
believe that in this year, when we are preparing to celebrate
the tenth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, all Member 
States of this Organization will bring their whole weight
to bear on the Lisbon authorities, so as to convert into
deeds the decisions whereby the Organization has unambiguously 
recognized the inalienable right of the populations 
under the Portuguese colonial yoke to self-determination 
and independence.

191. The United Nations has considered year after year
the intolerable conditions imposed by the racist apartheid
authorities upon millions of Africans in Zimbabwe, Namibia 
and South Africa. The grave responsibility resting on
the United Kingdom in Zimbabwe can in no way be 
reduced by the sinister and illegal decisions taken by Smith
and the band of usurpers which he leads. The people and
Government of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania wish
once again to reaffirm their whole-hearted solidarity with
all those fighting for freedom in the dire struggle for the
liberation of the African man in Zimbabwe, Namibia and
South Africa.

192. The contents of the Lusaka Manifesto presented
by His Excellency Hajj Ahmad Ahidjo, President of the
the Federal Republic of the Cameroon and now President of 
the Organization of African Unity, must be carefully
considered by every Member of the United Nations. Indeed, 
it would be most detrimental to the authority of this 
Organization and to the maintenance of peace if the
goodwill thus shown by a whole continent were to be ignored.

193. In the Middle East the Zionist authorities of Tel Aviv
continue to trample underfoot the fundamental principles
of the Charter and the decisions of the Organization. Their
forces continue to enjoy the fruits of their cowardly
aggression. Large parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan continue to suffer under a barbarous 
military occupation. The burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque, 
which has aroused the indignation of nearly all peoples
throughout the world and the responsibility for which rests
squarely on the shoulders of the Zionist occupation
authorities, has reminded the world of the grievous threat
to the Holy Places of Islam, Christianity and Judaism which
is inherent in the illegal and totally invalid decision taken
by the Zionist authorities regarding the annexation of the 
Arab part of the City of Jerusalem.

194. The people and Government of the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania salute with admiration the heroic resistance
which the population of the occupied territories is offering
to the Zionist oppressors. The legitimate struggle for 
liberation of the Palestinian people to recover its usurped
homeland enjoys the active support of all freedom- and 
justice-loving peoples. To these fighters for freedom the 
people and Government of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania 
will give all the moral and material assistance within their means.

195. It is urgent to understand that, unless the relevant 
decisions of the Security Council are speedily implemented
without any changes in the borders as they existed before
5 June 1967, the Organization will lose all possibility of 
controlling the explosive situation at present prevailing in 
that area and forfeit at the same time the confidence of 
those peoples, the very source of its authority.

196. The extremely dangerous situation existing in the 
Middle East must not cause us to forget the heroic struggle 
which the people of Viet-Nam are waging with such 
determination and success to ensure respect for their sacred
right freely to choose their own destiny. The announcement 
concerning the cessation of the bombing of North 
Viet-Nam, coinciding with the convening of the Paris 
Conference, gave rise to hopes which may well be now 
shattered by the hostile operations conducted by the 
United States forces in Viet-Nam, combined with the 
failure of the Paris negotiations to make any real progress. 
Like many other countries, the Government of the Islamic 
Republic of Mauritania considers that it would be both 
unrealistic and unreasonable to try to take away from 
Viet-Nam, at the conference table, that for which its heroic 
people have made such heavy sacrifices during a war that 
has lasted for over 20 years.

197. The Mauritanian people, its Party and Government 
wish once more to reaffirm their admiration and their 
support for that valiant people.

198. The forces of peace throughout the world and in the 
United States itself must continue their struggle to restore 
peace to Viet-Nam. That peace will only come when the 
United States occupation forces are completely withdrawn 
from the country and the parties accept the 10 point plan 
of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South 
Viet-Nam. One thing is certain, however: the just cause of 
those who are fighting imperialism in Viet-Nam will surely prevail.

199. Similarly, the cessation of all foreign interference in 
the affairs of Korea is an important condition for the 
maintenance of peace both in South-East Asia and throughout 
the world. The people and Government of the Islamic 
Republic of Mauritania consider that the Organization has a
duty to prevent the continued use of the United Nations 
flag to disguise the presence of foreign occupation forces in 
Korea. For peace to be restored in that troubled area it is 
necessary that the Korean people be allowed to choose
their own destiny freely without foreign interference.

200. The problem of disarmament is urgent; this is 
obvious to all Members of the Organization. The constant 
increase both in quantity and in effectiveness of weapons of 
mass destruction looms as a danger threatening not only the 
development but even the survival of mankind. The 
considerable sums spent on armaments make dangerous 
inroads into the limited resources available to the developing 
countries for the investments necessary to their economic 
and social development. Further, the balance of 
terror in which the world is now living should be replaced
by a genuine relaxation of international tensions conducive
to improved standards of international co-operation. The 
Mauritanian delegation accordingly extends its full support 
to all international efforts aimed at achieving a real general 
and complete disarmament.

201. The people and Government of the Islamic Republic 
of Mauritania do not, however, understand how anyone can 
envisage genuine progress with disarmament in the absence
of a country of over 700 million people which has become 
a nuclear Power. What real impact can the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons have on nuclear
disarmament so long as the People’s Republic of China is 
not a party to it? The Mauritanian delegation welcomes the 
measures suggested by the Soviet Union and the other 
socialist countries for Strengthening international security, 
such as the draft appeal [4/7654] proposed for adoption 
by the General Assembly and the draft convention on the 
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling
of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons and on 
the destruction of such weapons, submitted for consideration 
by Members of this Organization. Here again, despite
the efforts made by some Member States, the absence of 
the People’s Republic of China from the Organization is a
fundamental obstacle to any attempt to achieve substantial 
progress in the implementation of genuine disarmament 
measures. Moreover, the People’s Republic of China, a
thermonuclear Power with a population of over 700 million 
inhabitants, has gained for itself a place of the first 
magnitude on the international scene. This illustrates — if
any illustration is required—how unreasonable and dangerous 
it is to keep that great Power outside the Organization, 
in flagrant violation of the principle of universality
enshrined in our Charter.

202. It is for this reason that the delegation of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania wishes to reaffirm its belief that the
legitimate rights of the People’s Republic of China in the
United Nations must be restored without further delay. My
delegation rejects the “two Chinas” theory that some seek
to uphold in this Organization.

203. My delegation, in addressing this Assembly, cannot
fail to mention the concern it feels over the grave economic
and social problems that afflict the developing countries. It
is a matter for regret that in this matter, so vital to the
improvement of dealings among peoples and nations, the
co-operation of the wealthy countries should be so sorely lacking.

204. The disappointing results of the second session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
the failure of the first United Nations Development Decade
testify to the absence of any political will to take the
necessary measures to bring about a genuine international
economic co-operation in the interests of all Member
States. Through the fluctuations in the prices of raw
materials and the constant increases in the prices of
manufactured goods, the already scandalous gap between
the industrialized countries and the others is constantly
widening. The Organization must redouble its efforts to
encourage competition among the greatest Powers in the
important and inspiring field of peaceful scientific research
devoted to the improvement of man’s lot. It has often been
pointed out from this rostrum that over $200,000 million is
spent each year on armaments, whereas the transfer of
7 capital from the wealthy to the poor countries amounts
only to about $10,000 million. This is a disgraceful
situation that should not be countenanced in our century.

205. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is convinced that
no country will really be able to surmount under-development 
without a determined awareness of the very real,
indeed gigantic, efforts and sacrifices required of every
nation and person. It is for this reason that we wish to say
from this rostrum how deeply conscious we are of the need
for bilateral and multilateral systems, but at the same time
how aware we are that we must rely primarily upon
ourselves before relying upon others. Mauritania accordingly 
believes that the countries of the third world must not
slip into the easy-going and dangerous attitude of expecting
everything from outside assistance. Indeed, the industrialized 
countries, in their own long-term interests and in
the interests of mankind as a whole, must organize and
develop a genuine international economic co-operation that
can be a factor for peace and understanding among peoples
and constitute a powerful element in the genuine implementation 
of human rights for all men everywhere. But, as
we have already said, such co-operation must be paralleled
by our own awareness, efforts and sacrifices.

206. For the African continent, the people and Government 
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania see in the union
of countries around common objectives a powerful means
to bring about rapid progress in their economic growth. We
therefore consider useful all groupings at the level of
subregions, regions and whole continents. Such unions,
through the markets they form and the opportunity they
afford to Member States of harmonizing their development
plans, provide an appropriate and useful framework the
creation of which should be encouraged by the United
Nations. Such activities fit in perfectly with the work of
social and economic development performed by the Organization.

207. The admirable way in which the Secretary-General,
His Excellency U Thant, discharges his exalted and difficult
duties in the many and diverse fields of United Nations
activities is earning him the esteem and gratitude of all
peoples. The Mauritanian delegation would like once again
to assure him of the active support and the admiration of
the people and Government of Mauritania.

208. The thought of these conflicts and of these political
and economic difficulties which sometimes darken the
international horizon should not, however, make us forget
the positive role played by our Organization in the
restoration and maintenance of peace in the world.

209. In this year which has seen man accomplish the
incredible feat of walking on the moon, in this year of the
tenth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, we
express the sincere wish that every Member State shall work
to ensure respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter
and for the implementation of decisions taken by our
Organization. The somewhat waning confidence of the
peoples of the world in this Organization will thus flourish
once more for the greater well-being of mankind.