20. Madam President, nothing
said from this rostrum can add to your honour and prestige, 
but my Government wishes to add its voice to the
impressive choir of congratulations and good wishes. We
also wish to express our deep-felt respect for the memory
of the late Mr. Arenales, the President of the last Assembly.
Before I start, I should also like to convey greetings to our
Secretary-General and warm expressions of understanding
and confidence from my Government.

21. We meet today, as often before, under the shadow of
armed conflicts in many parts of the world. The tragic
events in Viet-Nam, the Middle East and Nigeria, as well as
the stalemate situation in the southern part of Africa, have
a direct bearing on the political climate in general, and
influence our ability to deal with other urgent problems of
the day. The Secretary-General has underlined these
dangers in the introduction to his annual report [A/7601/
Add.1]. With stark realism he points out that time is
running short when it comes to maintaining international
peace and security, developing friendly relations among
nations, and achieving international co-operation. Speakers
in this debate have reflected the same sentiment.

22. The optimism of the immediate post-war era has long
been replaced by a more subdued mood. The commitment
to international co-operation, so essential to our survival, is
often giving way to a policy of more narrow and limited
considerations. This trend must be reversed before it is too
late. International collaboration must be strengthened, and
our Organization must be used more effectively. This,
however, does not necessarily mean that all problems must
come to this Assembly to be debated and settled. There are
many questions which can be better and more efficiently
dealt with on a direct nation-to-nation basis or in the
context of a regional organization. Even so, the problems
must be seen in a wider perspective so that the legitimate
interests of the world community are never lost sight of.

23. My Government attempts to pursue a foreign policy
based on a strong feeling of international solidarity and a
realization of the interdependence of all nations. That also
explains our strong support of the United Nations. I should
like to underline that this support of the United Nations in
my country is deeply anchored in public opinion in all
segments of our population.

24. Our policy must be pragmatic but realism must not
degenerate into sterile pessimism. We must not forget the
progress which has been made in international co-operation
to in the post-war era, above all in the fields of economic and
social affairs. The United Nations has also, on many
occasions and in many contexts, played a significant role in
settling or contributing towards the settlement of political
disputes. It is now necessary to look forward and to devise
new methods and new programmes. We have to look at the
world as it is, but we must not submerge ourselves in an
obsession with the present predicament to such an extent
that we lose our perspectives. We must never 
forget — never — that our common interests are immeasurably
stronger and more lasting than what divides us.

25. We must learn from past mistakes, but leave the
burden of defeat behind us. We carry the present problems
with us and are challenged by problems to come. The rising
new generations demand of us a new spirit of willingness
and co-operation in finding solutions to common problems
and in undertaking new endeavours on a global basis. If that
will is lacking, the programmes we devise and the
machinery we establish will be of no avail.

26. There is a tendency today, whenever we face a serious
problem, to leave it to the big Powers to deal with. At the
same time there is a current of criticism against the great
Powers for arrogating to themselves too much power and
deciding the fate of all, big and small. The roles of the big
Powers, the middle-sized States and the small nations have
rather to be adjusted to it, and fitted together in the
common endeavours of finding solutions to the problems
facing us all. Their roles are, or at least ought to be,
complementary. There are certain questions where we feel
the great Powers must take the lead, such as the limiting of
strategic armaments. So is the situation in the Middle East.
However, that does not free the rest of us from responsibility.

27. As far as disarmament is concerned, the smaller
nations should let their voices be heard and express their
anxiety to the big Powers, which seem to be doing far less
than the situation requires. It is the fervent hope of my
Government that the United States and the Soviet Union
will soon start talks on the limitation of strategic armaments. 
We are dismayed at every new delay and we are
deeply concerned about the lack of progress.

28. It is also of the utmost importance that the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation on Nuclear Weapons [resolution
2373 (XXII)] should be ratified by as many nations as
possible. It is particularly important that the great Powers
should do so, and we applaud the step taken by the United
Kingdom in this respect. The beginning of talks on the
limitation of strategic armaments and the entry into force
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
are not only very important in themselves, but they will
also help to create the atmosphere of confidence which is
essential for progress in other fields as well.

29. Another such element is the proposed all-European
security conference. My Government has responded favourably 
to the invitation from the Government of Finland to
take part in such a conference. It must be well and
thoroughly prepared and must count the United States and
Canada as participants. Such a conference might improve
the political climate of the world; but at the same time, the
success of such a conference depends on the political
climate. I would be less than frank if I did not say that
developments in Czechoslovakia might have an important
bearing on the political climate in our world.

30. Another situation which fills us all with concern and
anxiety is the Middle East, where we do not seem to have
made any progress in the last year. A solution to the
conflict must be found within the framework of the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
[242 (1967)], which constitutes the basis for Ambassador
Jarring’s mission. We appreciate his efforts in carrying out
the Security Council resolution and welcome the increased
involvement of the big Powers in finding a solution. As we
see it, it is not a question of imposing a solution, but rather
of defining the elements that go into a solution and
broadening the common grounds for its acceptance, and
thus strengthen the position of Ambassador Jarring.

31. While encouraging the big Powers to assume their
responsibilities for the maintenance of peace and international 
security we should ail, even the smaller States, do
our utmost to search for and point out solutions. Above all,
we should pledge our readiness to assume our share of the
burdens and responsibilities in connexion with a settlement
of the conflict. The Norwegian Government has already
declared its willingness to contribute to an economic
development plan for the whole Middle East region if that
should be agreed upon.

32. One of the key elements in the whole Middle East
situation is the refugee problem. This is not only, primarily,
a humanitarian problem but, as recent developments in the
area have shown, it is above all a political question which
must be solved if a lasting settlement is to be found of the
Middle East conflict.

33. The suffering of the civilian population in Nigeria has
caused deep concern. The Norwegian Government has, on
strictly humanitarian grounds, contributed to the international 
relief work for the benefit of the civilian population. 
The many appeals by the Nordic Governments have
been solely motived by a desire to make the relief work
more effective and to offer their support for any measures
which may contribute to a solution of the conflict. We
strongly regret that it has not yet been possible to reach an
agreement for the resumption of flights bringing relief and supplies.

34. The Norwegian Government is cognizant of the ardent
efforts undertaken by the Organization of African Unity to
solve the conflict and is of the opinion that this Organization 
is especially well qualified for finding a basis for a
negotiated solution. The Foreign Ministers of the Nordic
countries discussed this problem at their recent meeting in
Reykjavik, Iceland. The Nordic countries will continue to
give their full support to mediation efforts through the
Organization of African Unity and other channels particularly 
well suited for bringing about contact and negotiations 
between the parties.

35. It is the intention of my Government, one of the
larger contributors to relief work during the civil war, to
view, positively, requests for assistance for the reconstruction 
of the war-devastated areas when the hostilities are
brought to an end. The Norwegian Government is also
prepared to comply with requests for observers and
personnel for control units in connexion with relief work or
a cease-fire.

36. The sea and what is in it has always played a large role
in the life of man. This importance has been reflected in the
sustained and positive contributions by the United Nations
towards a modern law of the sea. However, the great and
mysterious depths of the oceans have only recently been
drawn into international co-operation. Our Organization
embarked upon a vast and complex task when it took up
the question of the sea-bed and the ocean floor two years
ago. Perhaps the Assembly did not then quite realize the
size of the problem or the great potentialities for the
benefit of mankind. It has, however, begun to be understood 
that great political, economic, scientific and technical
problems will have to be solved before we can harvest the
riches on or beneath the ocean floor. The sea-bed Committee 
has done a constructive job and focused attention
on the problems before us. But time is of the essence.
Rapid progress must be made. Otherwise we risk creating
vested interests which will make our task desperately difficult.

37. During this session of the Assembly we must adopt at
least a set of principles as guidelines for the Committee in
its future work. The technical skill of the Member States to
exploit the sea-bed is rapidly expanding. The United
Nations has no time to lose if we wish to avoid a disastrous
race among nations in the exploitation of this area. The
result of such a race would deepen still more the chasm
between the rich and the poor nations. In the opinion of
the Norwegian Government, the exploitation of the sea-bed
and the ocean floor for peaceful purposes should be guided
by an international régime as soon as possible. The extent
of the area should be defined before it is too late. If this
session of the General Assembly could take a decision on
nothing else with regard to its long agenda than to establish
a set of principles for the sea-bed, it would nevertheless be
regarded as a successful session. An understanding amongst
us on this issue would require, however, that we raise our
eyes above national horizons. Only through genuine international 
co-operation and goodwill can we reach a solution
for the benefit of us all. While we strive to develop new
resources we must also protect all parts of our natural
heritage. We have not husbanded our resources with
prudence and foresight. In humanity's march to a continually 
increasing mastery of nature we have paid a terrible price.

38. Most of the problems connected with human environment 
cannot be solved individually by nations. The
situation calls for constructive efforts on the international
level. It is particularly important that the United Nations
take the lead in this work so as to give the necessary global
framework for the discussions. We are looking forward with
great expectations to the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment which will take place in Sweden in 1972.

39. This of course is only one example of the fact that the
political situation in the world is greatly influenced by the
serious economic and social problems which our Member
countries have to deal with. Much attention has been paid
to these problems in the past both by national Governments 
and by international organizations, particularly by
the United Nations family, but the impact of these
problems is still not fully realized. We have not yet quite
understood the importance of finding satisfactory answers
which will enable future generations to improve their
conditions of life.

40. It is against this background that my Government
views the work now under way in the various United
Nations organs in the preparation of the Second United
Nations Development Decade. We cannot, of course, in this
preparation find solutions for all the problems of the
developing countries. However, we should at least try to
learn to understand the problems and must try to find
better means of co-ordinating the national and international
efforts in this field. If we do that, the next General
Assembly may adopt the. strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade, which will be a useful
starting point. No strategy or even the most complete
analysis of the development problems can serve any
purpose unless the Governments back them up, and unless
the political will freely expressed by the people, rich and
poor, developed and developing nations alike, work on them.

41. The problem of economic and social development is a
very complex one. It changes from country to country and
may vary from region to region in the same country. The
responsibility for development policies must, obviously,
rest with the Government and the people of each individual
country. Most of the economic resources needed for
development must come from the developing countries
themselves. This does not at all mean that the efforts of the
industrialized nations can only have a marginal effect. It is,
first and foremost, their responsibility to ensure a steadily
expanding world economy and world trade. This is an
essential condition for economic and social progress in the
developing countries. They are, to a large extent, dependent
upon stable world markets for their products in order to
secure the necessary resources for their development.

42. Great efforts must be made to ensure a continually
increasing participation of the developing countries in
world trade. My Government strongly supports the efforts
made by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in this field. The contribution which
UNCTAD is making to the strategy of the Second United
Nations Development Decade will be extremely valuable.
Past experience has proved conclusively that more is to be
gained by quiet consultations and negotiations than by
direct confrontation in this as in many other fields.

43. In recent years science and technology have advanced
at a breath-taking pace unmatched during any previous
period. Even so, we have not solved the problem of
mobilizing unused resources in the developed countries.
There are still enormous resources in the sea which could be
used directly for feeding the hungry. There are also large
unused production facilities in agriculture which could be
used for the same purpose.

44. The United Nations can take pride in the steady
expansion of its work in the field of economic and social
affairs. There has been an increasing realization that these
matters are of common concern and have to be discussed
and handled on a global basis. At the same time there has
been an increasing awareness and acceptance of responsibility, 
on the part of the international community, with
regard to alleviating human suffering and safeguarding
human rights in disaster situations. Various forms of
humanitarian relief are now being provided through several
international agencies, governmental as well as private.
Experience has shown many weaknesses in the methods
which are at the disposal of the international community
when it is a question of providing humanitarian relief to the
civilian population in natural, as well as disaster situations.
Further steps of an international character are therefore
needed to ensure prompt and effective relief in such situations.

45. My Government, together with the Canadian Government, 
sponsored a declaration at the recent International
Red Cross Conference in Istanbul, setting forth a set of
principles for international humanitarian relief to civilian
populations in disaster situations. This declaration provides
that disaster relief for the benefit of civilian populations is
to be given without discrimination. It also states that the
offer of such relief by an impartial international humanitarian 
organization ought not to be regarded as an
unfriendly act. It is further laid down that all States are
requested to exercise their sovereign and other legal rights
so as to facilitate the transit, admission and distribution of
relief supplies provided by impartial international organizations 
for the benefit of civilian populations in disaster areas
when such situations imperil the life and welfare of the
population.

46. We hope that this declaration will give the needed
impetus to an increased acceptance on the part of the
international community and the individual Governments
for participation in relief work which has the humanitarian
needs of the affected population exclusively in mind.

47. Next year we shall celebrate the twenty-fifth birthday
of our Organization. This event affords a unique occasion
for taking stock of our achievements and for fixing our
aims for the future.

48. Several proposals have already been put forward to
change our Charter and other rules, and my Government
will, in due time, examine them with great care. But it is
quite clear that no changes will be of any deep significance
if we do not bring a new and positive spirit to our
Organization. We must meet our responsibilities in such a
way that we will give new confidence to men and women
all over the world and so inspire youth with a greater hope
in the future of the United Nations. This hope and this
confidence will be the touchstone of the future.