1. In the name of God the
merciful and compassionate, Madame President, my delegation 
tenders to Your Excellency its whole-hearted congratulations 
on your election as President of the twenty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. We also wish to express
our congratulations to our African brothers on this occasion.

2. The passing away of the late President of the Assembly,
Mr. Emilio Arenales, in the prime of his life and activity,
has saddened us all. We not only esteemed him for his
wisdom and dedication to the United Nations, but also
marvelled at the exemplary courage which he manifested by
resuming his duties when all the odds were against him in
the mortal disease that snatched him from amongst us. May
God in His mercy let his soul rest in peace.

3. Before embarking on the substance of my statement I
should like to take this opportunity of applauding our
indefatigable Secretary-General U Thant for the tireless
efforts he has exerted for world peace ever since his
election to the post.

4. It would be banal for me to repeat what has time and
again been mentioned by others, namely, that there is no
alternative for the United Nations as the best international
organ for establishing world peace and security. On the
other hand, I would be failing in my duty if I were to
ignore the fact that the United Nations has not, so far,
succeeded in averting wars from which small nations have
principally suffered; nor has the United Nations been able
to eradicate racial discrimination and some forms of
classical colonialism in Africa. We do hope that it will not
be long before South Africa, Rhodesia and Portugal realize
that it is in their own interest to liberate the peoples that
are still unjustifiably under their control.

5. We also regret that the policy of spheres of influence
still prevails, especially among the great Powers. The great
Powers which had a major role in drawing up the United
Nations Charter are still more or less acting in the same way
as the erstwhile great Powers did during the days of the
League of Nations, whose Covenant was ignored whenever
it did not serve their narrow national interests. Likewise
today we find that the principles set forth in the Charter,
instead of transcending the national interests of States, are
subjected to all kinds of dialectical interpretations and
rationalizations. It is for these reasons that we have hardly
made any significant progress towards paving the way to
world peace, and it becomes evident that some world
leaders have learned very little from the harsh lessons of
two world wars.

6. The Treaty of Versailles, no doubt, sowed the seeds of
the Second World War by flagrantly flouting the principles
of the self-determination of peoples and nations. The
leaders of the victorious nations which, to a large extent,
imposed the terms of peace on the defeated nations and
dictated the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, gerrymandered 
certain parts of Europe without due regard to
ethnological origin or the rudiments of justice. The spoils of
the First World War were also divided among the victors in
both Asia and Africa.

7. A mere glimpse at the world map after the Second
World War reveals that the same gross mistakes were
committed by the leaders who won the war for themselves
but left a legacy of perpetual conflict for small nations and
peoples. Motivated strictly by national interests, they may
blindly have sown the seeds of a third global conflict, even
before the Charter of the United Nations was signed. What
did these leaders do? They bisected countries and partitioned 
lands without due regard to the wishes of the
people. They even went as far as dividing the capital of one
of the defeated nations into four zones, which they
garrisoned with their own troops. They drew an imaginary
line dividing the people of a South-East Asian country. All
this and similar arbitrary arrangements were made shortly
before and immediately after the United Nations Charter
came into being. All this was done by these leaders since
they thought this was the best way of establishing
international security. In fact, what was done simply
duplicated what had happened at Versailles — new spheres of
influence were created.

8. This is not all. In spite of the fact that the principle of
self-determination was enshrined in the Charter and later
elaborated into a well-defined fundamental human right, we
find that the great Powers and their clients learned nothing
from the blunders of recent history because the right of
self-determination was entirely forgotten. Palestine was
partitioned in 1947; and in 1953 a South-East Asian
country, inhabited by one people, was divided into two
separate States that are at war with each other — all this in
the name of international security and democracy.

9. All that has happened in the post Second World War era
in Europe and South-East Asia is nothing compared with
what has befallen the indigenous people of Palestine. While
colonies were emerging as free countries in the continents
of Asia and Africa following the fall of empires, an alien
people from Central and Eastern Europe, most of whom
had embraced Judaism in the seventh and eighth centuries A.D., 
and were far from being Semites, usurped the
homeland of the indigenous people of Palestine. In 1947,
the year of the perfidious Balfour Declaration, the indigenous 
people of Palestine constituted 94 per cent of the
whole population of that country. It is superfluous to
mention that neither Balfour personally nor his Government 
had any right whatsoever to promise an alien people
from Europe a homeland in Palestine on the grounds of
their religion. Nevertheless, we must state that the dictators
at the Versailles Conference endorsed the treacherous
Balfour Declaration at the expense of the Palestinian people
when President Wilson clamoured for the principle of
self-determination.

10. In 1939, the Jewish population of Palestine, which
had been placed under a British Mandate, grew by massive
immigration, mostly illegal, to one third of the whole
population. When the British mandatory Power tried to
regulate the immigration that had swollen in the thirties
and immediately after the Second World War on account of
the resistance of the indigenous people of the land, the
Zionists organized several terrorist gangs who literally got
away with murder by hanging British Tommies, killing Lord
Moyne, as well as massacring Palestinians who persistently
resisted this new invasion from Europe under the banner of
Zionism. This invasion was not dissimilar to the religious
wars of the Middle Ages which were motivated by religion
for political and economic ends. The Zionists have claimed
Palestine on false and baseless grounds. Time and again our
delegation has asked that the usurping State of Israel
produce the title deed to Palestine which, it is claimed, the
Creator gave to the Jews. By the same token, we ask, did
Balfour and those who implemented his foul promise have a
power of attorney from God to transfer Palestine to these
usurping Zionists? It is indeed ludicrous to put up such
claims on the grounds of which these alien Zionists, mainly
of Khazar origin, have been granted the right to rob the
Palestinians of their land and patrimony.

11. The usurping State of Israel, abetted as it has been by
the great Powers and their clients who voted for the
partition of Palestine and the ultimate introduction of a
foreign element in the body politic and body social of the
Middle East, will remain an abscess in the area causing a
high fever of tension and perpetual conflict which may,
God forbid, plunge the world into another world war. If the
Jews, as a persecuted people in Europe, had taken refuge in
Palestine and the Middle East, motivated by religious
sentiments and not by false political claims, they would
have lived at peace with the Semitic indigenous people of
Palestine. Instead, they invaded the land with false claims
and intimidated the whole population by crimes such as
those perpetrated in Deir Yassin and other localities. When
these usurping Zionists suspected that Count Bernadotte
might level some criticism at them for their dastardly acts,
they shot him with impunity.

12. Over a million Palestinian refugees who fled in terror
and now live in camps on six or seven cents a day per
person, together with compatriots of theirs scattered in
many countries, have finally awakened to the fact that all
the United Nations resolutions concerning the Palestine
question have been futile, having had no impact whatsoever
on the usurpers.

13. Consequently they have organized themselves to
regain their homeland, as it has dawned upon them that the
whole United Nations family is not willing to or capable of
rendering them justice and redressing the grievous harm
done unto them. These freedom fighters are called terrorists
by the Zionists and their cohorts. On the other hand, the
forces of resistance that went underground against the
Nazis in occupied Europe have been dubbed heroes; so were
the Irgun, Zvai Lumi, Stern, Haganah and other gangs who
massacred the indigenous people of Palestine, destroyed
their homes, killed their cattle and cut down their trees.
The Arab people have been galvanized into action by the
sacrificial resolve of the people of Palestine to regain their
homeland.

14. Neither the late Mr. Churchill nor the late Mr. Roosevelt, 
nor the late Mr. Stalin for that matter, considered the
nazi conquest of European territories as a fait accompli.
can assure the General Assembly that the occupation of
Palestine by these alien people, the non-Semitic Khazars of
Central and Eastern Europe, will never be considered a fait
accompli by the whole Arab people — a hundred million of
them who are steadfast in their faith that, as in the past,
usurpers come and usurpers go but ultimately the Palestinian 
people will regain their homeland.

15. As far as Jerusalem is concerned, let me be explicit
once more about our position, which has repeatedly been
made clear since the desecration of that Holy City by the
invader. This is not the first time that Jerusalem has fallen
into the hands of alien conquerors. Where are these
conquerors now? They are but names in the annals of
history. Jerusalem is as holy to Islam as it is to the other
monotheistic religions. If the Christian nations, whose
populations number about a billion, do not care about
Jerusalem falling into the hands of Zionists, who, incidentally, 
are a mere fraction of world Jewry estimated at about
17 million, let me make it patently clear that over 600
million Moslems will not continue to remain with their
arms folded and accept the spurious claims of those
Zionists who are unwittingly creating a world problem
which may very well make a scapegoat of innocent Jews,
especially in the Western world, where Zionist activists have
wormed themselves into the policy-making machinery of
governments, including legislative bodies, quite apart from
controlling the mass media of information.

16. The Islamic Summit Conference held from 22 to 25
September 1969 in Rabat has shown the whole world that
the Islamic world has been jolted into a consciousness of
the danger that threatens its first kiblah. The sincere
solidarity and the fervent fraternal spirit manifested at
Rabat is only the beginning. It is the dawn of Islamic unity
all over the world. The millstones of Islam may grind slowly
but they will grind and grind and grind until, God willing,
Jerusalem and the whole land of Palestine is restituted to its
legitimate owners, who have been denied their right of
self-determination by pressures and conspiracies inside and
outside the United Nations.

17. While we are aware of the multifarious problems
facing this Assembly, my Government wishes to reiterate its
unequivocal position regarding Jerusalem and Palestine
because of its deep concern with this question, which, as
you may have noticed, constitutes the theme of my
statement before this Assembly. If peace with justice is to
bypass the peoples of Palestine, we predict a continuous
state of conflict and turmoil in the Middle East. Should this
be the case, we also fear that a third world war may be
inevitable. The turn of events in the Middle East will,
therefore, determine the fate of the United Nations. Either
this Organization will follow the same pattern as that of the
League of Nations, which led to its disintegration, or it will
muster enough courage to rise above petty national
interests and the policy of spheres of influence pursued by
the super-Powers irrespective of the aspirations of peoples
struggling for their independence and the redemption of
their sovereignty.

18. In conclusion, I should like to state that His Majesty
King Faisal and my Government still hope that, before it is
too late, the better part of wisdom will prevail, especially
among the great Powers, which, if they wish, can pave the
way for peace in the Middle East by having real justice done
unto the indigenous people of Palestine.

19. I cannot bring this statement to an end without
invoking God’s guidance to us all.