168. Madam President, it gives me great pleasure to
extend to you my hearty congratulations upon your
election as President of the General Assembly. We have a
very full agenda, perhaps too full and the present session of
the Assembly is no better off than preceding sessions with
regard to the crises and the violence that continue to poison
the atmosphere of international relations. In the circumstances,
we have the difficult task of engaging in useful and
fruitful discussions on questions directly affecting peace
and security and of focusing our attention on economic
problems of an urgent nature. It is thus with the prospect
of much hard work before us that your talent, your
experience of the United Nations and of international
affairs and your personal charm will be called upon to guide
our debates to a successful conclusion. Your election has
certainly another significance: it is evidence of the
ever-increasing role played by the dynamism of the African
continent in the field of international politics. I wish to
assure you of my delegation’s whole-hearted support in the
performance of your important duties.

169. I also wish to associate myself with the tributes paid
by several speakers to the memory of the late President,
Mr. Emilio Arenales. I need not repeat what has already
been said regarding his qualities, which have always been
universally admired. In Mr. Arenales, Guatemala has lost a
distinguished statesman and the United Nations a faithful
servant of the cause of peace and international understanding.

170. The establishment of an international order based on
law and justice is still the main subject of our interventions.
The United Nations continues to be a meeting place where
we air our complaints rather than a forum where the
individual efforts of our Governments are harmonized to
deal with the various problems threatening our peace,
tranquillity and conscience. This discouraging observation
at least has the advantage of showing us the way in which
we should direct our efforts in order to make this
Organization the guardian of peace and international
stability.

171. Unfortunately, the bane of our time is not our failure:
to recognize the danger involved in recourse to force,
injustice, discrimination and suspicion everywhere, but
rather our inability to provide effective remedies commensurate
with the seriousness of our problems. We must bow
to facts: the Organization will never be able to perform the
functions assigned to it in the Charter as long as relations
between countries are not guided by the ideals and
principles laid down together with these functions. The
succession of disappointments we have suffered is no more
than the consequence of discordant and divergent attitudes.

172. However, I do not wish to seem pessimistic. Fortunately,
there are certain new developments which are
indicative of a more promising outlook. Indeed, some
critical problems seem to have become less acute, even if
they have not yet been solved. My meaning is that if we are
to attain the objective of mankind, that of universal peace
and stability, we must all strive to eliminate the sources of
tension and prevent the formation of others, while seeking
out those areas which lend themselves to fruitful co-operation
within the community of nations. This, of course,
requires a positive and constructive approach towards
problems whose solution depends in the first place on the
spontaneous and willing co-operation of all countries. It is
precisely the absence of this essential element which is at
the root of many of the disturbing situations and upheavals
that endanger peace and stability.

173. It is distressing to find that some of our problems are
anachronisms in this age, of which one of the most
characteristic features is the emancipation of man and the
recognition of the right of peoples freely to determine their
own destiny. We are saddened to note that, in practice,
respect for the rights of man, the basis of liberty, justice
and peace in the world, still leaves much to be desired.
There are still to be found on our planet repugnant
practices based on discrimination on account of race,
colour or religion. In our day these practices constitute an
inadmissible denial of fundamental human rights.

174. Turkey, which has just been elected to the Commission
on Human Rights, is very glad to be able to take an
active part in the constructive work of this Commission,
whose aim is to bring about universal and effective respect
for the dignity of the individual.

175. I have more than once had an opportunity to speak
on the question of the elimination of colonialism since the
adoption of the Declaration on decolonization, of which
Turkey is proud to have been a sponsor and of which we
will be celebrating the tenth anniversary next year. We must
persevere in this course and continue to exert unremitting
efforts in order to bring colonialism to an end as quickly as
possible.

176. Vestiges of colonialism are mainly to be found in the
southern part of the African continent. The conscience of
mankind rejects the policy. of apartheid and racial discrimination
practised by the Government of South Africa, which
is giving a most objectionable example of the enslavement
of peoples by refusing to grant Namibia its independence
despite all the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. The United Nations Council for Namibia,
of which Turkey is a member, has once again drawn the
attention of the Security Council to the seriousness of the
situation in this part of Africa. It is regrettable that the
Government of South Africa does not seem prepared to
respond to the appeal made to it by the Security Council to
withdraw its administration from Namibia before 4 October
1969 [see resolution 269 (1969)].

177. Another distressing example of colonialism is provided
by the illegal racist and minority régime of Southern
Rhodesia. Turkey has scrupulously applied the measures
prescribed by the Security Council against this inhuman
régime, which has just carried out a farcical referendum of
which the outcome was known in advance. I need hardly
add that the constitution that emerged from this so-called
referendum and which aims at the consolidation of the
racist régime in Southern Rhodesia is not legally valid.

178. Our Organization must pursue its untiring efforts and
adopt the appropriate measures so that the people of
Zimbabwe may achieve their independence.

179. I trust I shall not be trying the patience of the
Assembly if I dwell rather fully on the situation in the
Middle East, where the conflict has definitely taken a turn
for the worse, particularly recently. In fact, we are
witnessing an increase in tension along the cease-fire line
which has given rise to deep concern among all those who
hope to see peace restored in the region as soon as possible.
The frequent clashes between the armed forces of the
parties concerned have tended to take on the dimensions of
full-scale military operations.

180. It would be a mistake to view the violence in the
region solely in the light of violations of the Security
Council’s cease-fire resolutions. I do not believe that
appeals for moderation can really suffice to maintain calm
as long as efforts to facilitate a solution to the conflict do
not hold out hope of an early settlement.

181. The burning of the Al Aqsa mosque has added a very
critical element to an already alarming situation. This
sacrilegious act has plunged the Moslems of the world into a
state of great emotion and deep sorrow and has certainly
further emphasized the need to do everything possible to
solve this conflict, which renders the Middle East an
explosive region. At this stage it would not be proper to
make any accusation, but it is difficult to absolve the
country occupying the Arab part of Jerusalem of responsibility
for an act committed in a place under its military
jurisdiction. It is all the more regrettable that this country
continues to ignore the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council calling upon it to
rescind all measures that would have the effect of altering
the status of the city of Jerusalem.

182. In this connexion, it is worth recalling here the
statement issued by the Conference of Heads of State held
in the capital of Morocco barely a week ago. This
statement not only drew attention to the emotion aroused
in the Moslem world by the burning of the Al Aqsa mosque
but also once again highlighted the urgency of achieving
just and fair solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.

183. A year ago I stated in the General Assembly that
continued occupation of Arab territories and the non-application
of the General Assembly resolutions concerning
Jerusalem constituted a serious threat to both the stability
of the region and world peace. Today I will repeat the
statement with even greater emphasis. If the main objective
is the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East which would pave the way to normal relations among
the countries of the region, it is obvious that the fait
accompli and the acquisition of territory through the use of
armed force are not the correct methods for attaining this
objective. Let us hope that the recent deterioration of the
situation in general and the burning of the Al Aqsa mosque
in particular will induce us to redouble our efforts to end
the deadlock in the Middle East conflict.

184. Fortunately we have a valuable basis for a political
settlement in the shape of the Security Council resolution
[242 (1967)]. I wish here to express my Government’s
support for the steps taken by the Governments of four
permanent members of the Security Council. These two-Power
and four-Power talks are for us a source of hope and
a sign that the possibilities of achieving a solution are not
yet foreclosed. We have noted with satisfaction that the
United States and the Soviet Union are making renewed
efforts to achieve a settlement of the Middle East conflict.
These steps could insure the success of Mr. Jarring’s
mission, provided the countries directly affected by the
conflict also lend their support.

185. I also wish to make a few remarks on a subject of
direct concern to Turkey: the question of Cyprus. More
than a year has elapsed since the beginning of talks between
the two communities of Cyprus. The purpose of these talks
is to seek out and explore the basis for a return to normal
conditions and to constitutional order on the island. We
believe that this dialogue should have a successful outcome,
since the future of Cyprus-closely depends on complete
agreement between the two elements of the island and on
their fair and balanced participation in all the activities of
an independent State.

186. To this end, the two communities must show
understanding and tolerance towards one another in order
to prepare the basis for an administration of the State of
Cyprus that would be founded on mutual respect for their
separate identities as national communities. If one of the
parties should develop the illusion that it had a monopoly
of wisdom and reason and expect the other party to make
all the concessions, it must be recognized that such a state
Of mind is not conducive to achieving a solution. I believe
that in the light of the lessons of the past, Greece and
Turkey have a great responsibility to see to it that the two
communities of Cyprus are not tempted to adopt such a
fruitless attitude.

187. The restoration of confidence and the preservation of
security are essential for the progress of the talks now
under way. Consequently, we believe that the United
Nations Force in Cyprus must be maintained at its most
effective level. I should once again like to thank the
Secretary-General and other United Nations authorities for
their constructive interest in the question of Cyprus, and
also to thank the Governments that have contributed to the
formation and operations of the United Nations Peace-Keeping
Force in Cyprus.

188. The conflict in Viet-Nam continues to be a source of
concern to the world. Although the Paris talks have not yet
produced tangible results, the marked reduction in the level
of military operations is certainly creating an atmosphere
more propitious to the search for a solution. The steps
taken by the United States Government are likely to
facilitate such a process. I believe that all Governments with
a particular interest in the re-establishment of peace and
stability in this part of the world should support the efforts
aimed at ending the conflict.

189. The question of disarmament continues to be a cause
for serious concern. The final objective, which is general
and complete disarmament under international control, is
no longer even taken up directly. Due to the continuing
armaments race, particularly in the field of nuclear
weapons, all mankind is subject to a danger without
precedent in history. It must be recognized that the results
of the efforts thus far deployed to halt this race, sincere
though they may have been, are somewhat meagre in
comparison with the magnitude and urgency of the
problem. Even in those areas where we were able to register
some progress, much remains to be done to complete the task.

190. The partial nuclear test-ban treaty remains to be
completed by the extension of the ban to underground
testing. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)], which is the most
recent, cannot prove its worth unless it receives a greater
number of accessions and unless the nuclear countries
themselves are able to reach agreement on certain restrictive
measures directly affecting their nuclear arsenals. I hasten
to add that the contacts now taking place between the
United States and the Soviet Union with a view to the
opening of negotiations on the limitation of strategic
nuclear arms give us ground for hope in this connexion.

191. My Government appreciates and supports the trend
that is gaining ground towards the prevention of the spread
of armaments into areas that have not yet been contaminated.
An important step in this direction was the Treaty
on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies [resolution 2222 (XXI)]. Work
is in progress on another equally important matter, instructive
efforts are being made to ensure the utilization of the
sea-bed and the ocean floor for exclusively peaceful
purposes and the exploitation of those areas for the
well-being of all mankind. Such action meets the desire to
forestall activities that it might prove impossible to prevent
later on, and it also opens up prospects for fruitful
co-operation in the interests of the community of nations.

192. Nor is there any doubt that we should direct our
knowledge in the field of chemistry and biology solely to
the well-being of mankind. Consequently, while we favour
wider accession to the 1925 Geneva Protocol for the
Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous
or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
we also hope that complementary arrangements will be
made to reinforce the ban provided for in that Protocol. We
are highly gratified by certain steps taken to this effect.

193. In this connexion, I should like to underline the
growing role being played at Geneva by the Committee on
Disarmament as the forum for dealing with questions of
disarmament. The increase in the number of the Committee’s
members from 18 to 26 is in accord with the general
desire that its composite membership should be adopted to
take account of the intensified interest in its work.

194. Where disarmament is concerned, our balance sheet is
far from satisfactory and we are aware of the obstacles that
must be overcome before we cover the distance that
separates us from our final goal. But given the results thus
far achieved, we remain convinced of both the necessity
and the usefulness of pursuing our efforts unflaggingly. In
any event mankind has no alternative but to overcome the
challenge posed by these ultimate weapons of its own creation.

195. After these remarks of a political nature, I wish now
to make some brief comments on problems in another
equally important sphere, namely, international co-operation
in the economic field, a subject on which various
opinions have already been expressed.

196. The determination of developing countries to achieve
economic and social development is well known. This
determination, which is general throughout the developing
world, should surely be reflected and implanted in the work
of the Organization. In this respect we note that promising
and significant developments have taken place in recent
years. Indeed, even now, the Preparatory Committee for
the Second United Nations Development Decade is at work
drawing up the International Development Strategy for the
next 10 years. Every one of the States Members of the
Organization, whether developed or developing, has a duty
to assist in bringing this undertaking to a successful
conclusion, for it is not only the prosperity and happiness
of the majority of mankind that is at stake, but the very
foundations of peace and stability.

197. We are faced with the alternative: we will either
muster the requisite political will and adopt the necessary
policies, in both developed and developing countries, to
ensure a satisfactory rate of progress or we will run the risk
of anarchy, the result of unfulfilled hopes and chronic
frustration. There is no question that the main responsibility
for the economic development of developing countries
lies with those countries themselves. However, their
efforts in this direction need strong encouragement and
support from the developed countries.

198. In this inter-dependent world of ours it is time to
redouble our efforts to co-operate in promoting economic
and social development. The unprecedented affluence of
the industrialized countries makes it possible for them to
set aside the necessary resources for this purpose. Science
and technology, moreover, continue to provide man with
the most effective tools to overcome age-old obstacles. In
addition to bilateral procedures, the Organization itself is
provided with various institutional mechanisms for the
channelling of assistance to developing countries. If we
succeed in reaching a substantial degree of agreement on
the policy measures to be adopted within the framework of
the International Development Strategy, and if we have the
imagination and perception to implement those measures,
we shall surely reach an historic milestone in international
co-operation.

199. The Turkish delegation draws great satisfaction from
the knowledge that the problems of the deteriorating
human environment are finally receiving due attention from
the United Nations. Problems of such vast proportions need
to be dealt with on a world-wide scale, and we believe that
the United Nations is in a good position to set up the
framework and procedure necessary for co-ordinated international
action in this field.

200. In Turkey, we are engaged in preparations for the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment, scheduled for 1972, and we are in favour of
the Conference being held in Sweden, the country which
took the praiseworthy initiative of bringing the question
before the United Nations.

201. The Organization’s activities in such fields as economic
development, population, the human environment,
human rights, the peaceful uses of outer space, the
exploitation of the resources of the sea-bed are not only in
line with the objectives of the United Nations but also open
up new vistas for international co-operation. I believe that
our faith in the United Nations will have been amply
justified and rewarded by our achievements in the pursuit
of these economic and social objectives.

202. A new era has dawned. The dream of conquering the
universe, which has captivated man’s imagination for
centuries, has just become reality. The brave American
astronauts, symbols of man’s ingenuity, have set foot on
the moon. Modern science and technology have once again
proved that the genius of man knows no bounds in the
attainment of his objectives. The recent spectacular success
in the field of science would, however, be much more
gratifying if man, who has just set off for the conquest of
space, could also place the same ingenuity at the service of
mankind for the solution of his political, economic, social
and humanitarian problems.

203. Ironic though it may be, this remark leads me to
nurse the well-founded hope that we shall achieve a better
world than the one in which we are now living. I am sure
that through goodwill, common sense and perseverance we
shall succeed in building the better world to which we all aspire.
