1. Madam President, allow me to
congratulate you most warmly on your election to the high
office of President of this Assembly. Your election reflects
the important role which the women of Africa are
determined to play in the international community. We
wish you a most successful term of office.

2. For the first time in several years, the General Assembly
is not admitting a new member. The absence this year of
the admission of a new member does not reflect work well
done, but rather a regrettable setback for the United
Nations in its sacred task of ensuring that colonialism is
dead. This session must therefore ensure that this setback is
only a temporary one. We must ensure that the still
unfinished task of bringing freedom and human dignity to
all people is not forgotten but is carried on and successfully
completed.

3. Indeed, the urgent problem facing Africa is precisely
the issue of colonialism and racial discrimination. The
forces of colonialism in Africa are becoming more firmly
entrenched. The South African régime has strengthened its
arsenals of war. With this continually increasing strength
the South African régime has gone further to consolidate its
abominable rule of tyranny over the Territory of Namibia,
completely ignoring the overwhelming opinion of mankind
as expressed in numerous resolutions of the United Nations.
Indeed, the United Nations has brought ridicule upon itself
by its failure to implement its decisions on Namibia and to
save it from the grabbing hand of the Pretoria clique which
wishes to usurp it and permanently enslave its people.

4. To the north, in spite of the gallant struggle being
waged by the freedom fighters in Mozambique, Angola and
Guinea (Bissau), Portugal has built up confidence and is
now striving to consolidate itself, since it sees this as the
only way to continue exploiting the riches of Africa and
thus save its crumbling economy. Any success it has
achieved in fighting the forces of African nationalism has
been carried out only through the massive economic and
military assistance which it obtains from its allies. It is this
same assistance that sustains the economy and military
strength of South Africa. It is for this reason that we appeal
to all countries which profess to be opposed to the evils of
colonialism and racial discrimination to stop giving military
and financial assistance to Portugal and South Africa.

5. The South African régime has also made a determined
and persistent thrust northwards. On the one hand, it is
seeking to strengthen its allies in Rhodesia and the
Portuguese-controlled Territories of Angola and Mozambique 
and, on the other, it is out to establish puppet
régimes in independent African States through deceit and
subversion. We do not consider that these gestures are
genuine, friendly and calculated to achieve the dignity of
the black man on our continent. These gestures are
calculated to extend the unacceptable philosophy of the
superiority of one race. To make matters worse, those who
resist this pressure and stand firm on the principles of
equality and human dignity are being threatened with
increasing subversion and open aggression from South
Africa and Portugal.

6. This year Portugal has attacked Guinea and threatened
lives and property in that State. This is in addition to the
constant attacks that have been made on Zambia and the
United Republic of Tanzania. We have no doubt that these
acts of aggression will continue unless strong measures are
taken by the Security Council to contain the situation. The
stage is thus being set for the final confrontation between
the minority racist régimes and the independent African
States. The world, however, cannot afford to stand-by as a
passive observer: It is not for love of war but because of
their commitment to the principles of human equality and
dignity that independent African States are opposed to
colonialism and racial discrimination, which is being
practised in South Africa. It is also on the basis of their
commitment to those universally accepted principles that
independent African States appeal to other Members of the
United Nations for support. The dignity of all men is
destroyed when a section of humanity is denied its rights.
Above all, without an acceptance of and a commitment to
the principles of human dignity, equality and self-determination, 
there can be no basis for peace and justice in the world.

7. In April 1969 the Heads of State and Government of
East and Central Africa, desirous of spelling out their
attitude and purpose in relation to the problems existing in
southern Africa, adopted in Lusaka a Manifesto on Southern 
Africa. Earlier this month this Manifesto was unanimously 
adopted in Addis Ababa by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its sixth session. The Lusaka Manifesto is an
affirmation of the principles of justice, equality and human
dignity. In it the African leaders have stated that they wish
to make clear beyond all shadow of doubt their acceptance
of the belief that all men are equal and have the right to
human dignity. These are the same sentiments as those to
which the United Nations Charter is committed. The
Manifesto defines the attitude of independent African
States to the racist régime in South Africa and to the
philosophy of apartheid. It explains in very clear terms the
alternatives before independent African States and before
the liberation movements in southern Africa. The Manifesto
highlights the serious situation existing in the region and
the threat to and deep concern of the independent African
States. It was for that reason that the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African Unity
charged its present Chairman, the President of Cameroon,
with the duty of presenting the Manifesto to the United
Nations General Assembly. We sincerely hope that this
Assembly will fully appreciate the spirit in which the
Manifesto was conceived and reaffirm its belief in the
principles to be found in the United Nations Charter by
adopting the Manifesto. Those principles have almost been
lost sight of in Rhodesia.

8. In Rhodesia, as we foresaw and feared, we are now
witnessing the final abandonment by the United Kingdom
of its responsibility. Another apartheid-style régime is being
created while the United Kingdom Government is passively
sitting with its arms folded in complacency. It is now four
years since the unilateral declaration of independence and
all we have heard from the United Kingdom is that force
must not be used and that sanctions will soon bring about a
change of heart among the racists and eventually lead them
to return to legality and accept majority rule. We say the
world has waited long enough. Sanctions have failed, owing
to the support which the South African régime and.
Portugal have given. At the same time Smith and his
colleagues have in fact entrenched their positions and they
are adopting even more extreme measures to safeguard
white supremacy and the enslavement of the Africans who
constitute the majority in that country.

9. While Smith is introducing an apartheid-style constitution, 
all that the United Kingdom Government is prepared
to do is remove its futile representative and suitably honour
him for his services. From now on Rhodesia is no different
from South Africa and only over-all action against all the
minority régimes in southern Africa can hope to be
successful. Therefore, the United Nations should not listen
to, and be deceived by, those who preach half-hearted
measures. We urge the Security Council to face up to its
responsibilities and take strong measures to halt the rapidly
deteriorating situation. Until that is done, independent
African States have no choice but to support the liberation
movements in their armed struggle against those régimes.
The Security Council, as the primary organ of the United
Nations charged with the maintenance of international
peace and security, has a responsibility to perform and
should have sufficient courage to take the necessary action.
The racists should not be allowed on the one hand to reject
the cherished principles of justice and equality and on the
other to benefit through friendly international relations
which are based on those very same principles. Without
action by the Security Council, peace in Africa will remain
threatened and insecure.

10. The failure of the members of the Security Council,
particularly the permanent members, who are responsible
for peace and security in the world, to divorce themselves
from siding with those who threaten peace and security is
the main reason for the continued worsening of the world
situation and the inability of the United Nations to perform
its functions effectively. As we approach the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, the role of the Security
Council is a matter that needs examination.

11. It is most disturbing to find that in all major conflicts
threatening international peace and security, the permanent
members of the Security Council, who should always be on
the side of peace, are the ones fanning the flames of war.
When those most responsible for peace and security are so
committed on the side of war, how can they at the same
time effectively play the role of mediator and peace-maker? 
Is it any wonder that the United Nations has
become powerless and is not playing a major role in the
preservation of peace and security? We must emphasize
that the permanent members of the Security Council must
play an impartial role. The taking of sides in any major
conflict is bound to aggravate the situation and spread
tension rather than establish conditions for the settlement
of disputes.

12. What lessons can we learn by looking at the major
conflicts in the world? The tragic civil war in Nigeria, the
Middle East conflict and the war in Viet-Nam all clearly
teach us one lesson. In Nigeria, as in the Middle East and
Viet-Nam, the major Powers who are the permanent
members of the Security Council, and who should be on
the side of peace, are actively involved with one party or
another in all these wars.

13. The situation in Nigeria is being greatly aggravated by
the presence of foreign interests on both sides of the civil
war. We believe that a peaceful solution can be achieved
through negotiations so long as outside Powers are not
involved.

14. The situation in the Middle East could also be quickly
solved if all the big Powers were firmly committed to
finding a peaceful and just solution. Again, it is most
regrettable that some of the members of the Security
Council are not devoid of self-interest in this matter and are
for selfish reasons actively arming the warring parties. How
then can these Powers help to find peace? We patiently
wait to hear of any success that may be achieved through
the talks of the big Powers now taking place.

15. Similarly, in the case of the Viet-Nam war, we find
that the failure of the permanent members of the Security
Council to have a common approach to peace is largely
responsible for the continuation of this most tragic and
costly war. Mankind has waited most patiently to hear the
results of the Paris peace talks. We therefore cannot
emphasize enough the urgent necessity of reaching an
agreement and establishing lasting peace in Viet-Nam.

16. The problems of achieving peace and security in the
world require realism on the part of the permanent
members of the Security Council. It is an inescapable fact
that no permanent solution of the problems of disarmament, 
nor those of world peace, can be found while a large
section of mankind is excluded from this world body. This
year, when mankind salutes the great scientific achievement
of setting the first man on the moon, it is high time that a
sense of realism was adopted towards the major problems
facing mankind here on earth. It is unfortunate to pretend
that a Government which controls and represents the
largest nation in the world does not exist. Most important
of all, this same nation now possesses means of massive
destruction. We must again state that it is in the interest of
peace and security that the People’s Republic of China
Should become a Member of the United Nations.

17. The problems of peace are also the problems of human
development. His Holiness the Pope, on his arrival in
Uganda for his historic visit to Africa, appropriately stated
that “Development is the new name for peace“. As we
approach the Second United Nations Development Decade,
we should bear in mind these wise words. It is impossible to
have any lasting peace when the world is divided into the
rich and the poor, just as it is impossible to have any
meaningful development when there is no peace. Poverty
cannot be eradicated by, the poor alone. While it is
imperative that the developing countries play their role, a
great responsibility rests with the economically advanced
regions. That is why we have persistently called upon those
countries to eliminate the discriminatory obstacles which
impede the development of the poor regions.

18. Permanent members of the Security Council, who are
primarily responsible for peace and security, are also
members of the Economic and Social Council, the principal
organ of the United Nations for economic and social
development. It is therefore imperative that those countries
should be on the side of both peace and economic
development. It is a fact that poverty still remains the most
noticeable and most regrettable characteristic of this world
in this modern age. Next year, we shall not only be
celebrating the silver jubilee of the formation of this
organization, but perhaps what is most significant and vital
to Africa is that we shall be entering the Second United
Nations Development Decade. It is therefore fitting that we
examine the role of the United Nations and see how we can
eliminate areas of weakness and make the United Nations
and its agencies more effective.

19. The developing countries are making great attempts to
help themselves to uplift their standard of living. In our
continent, the Organization of African Unity and regional
bodies such as the East African Community have attempted
to increase trade among Member countries and promote
regional co-operation in economic and social spheres. The
practical meaning that the United Nations can give this
activity is to realize that Africa wants to play its full role in
eradicating social and economic evils. We wish to see the
United Nations playing a bigger role and working clearly
and very closely with the Organization of African Unity in
meeting Africa’s aspirations in economic spheres.

20. This year, the Organization of African Unity has
played an increasingly effective role in economic and social
development. It should however be helped by the United
Nations and its agencies. This help can be channelled
through growing participation in the institutions of the
Organization of African Unity, such as the African Development 
Bank, and through greater co-operation from the
Economic Commission for Africa.

21. We in Uganda look to the United Nations and its
agencies for active assistance in building our infrastructure.
The United Nations and its agencies should not be
contented merely with producing feasibility studies which
yield no productive results. We expect them to co-operate
in the provision of finance for development. It is in this
way that we shall appreciate the role of multilateral
agencies. It is by determined efforts to understand Africa’s
development needs that the United Nations economic role
will be measured in the coming development decade.

22. It is imperative to educate world opinion about the
growing problems created by a continuing divided world of
the poor and the rich. In order to do this, the United
Nations, and particularly its Secretariat and officials, should
themselves fully appreciate the problems they are required
to tackle. The senior officials of the United Nations and its
agencies should make a point of familiarizing themselves
with the problems of development, by physically visiting us
in our environment, discussing development priorities and
examining how best they can assist in meeting our goals It
is paradoxical that while policy-makers find it necessary to
come here every year and discuss these issues, very few
visits are made by top officials of the United Nations
Secretariat and the United Nations agencies to developing
countries where these problems could be examined on the
spot. In the Second Development Decade we expect the
United Nations and its agencies to move away from
preoccupation with theory, and instead actively to deal.
with practical problems to be found in the field. The top
officials of the United Nations, the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme and all the major agencies
of the United Nations should, regularly for this purpose,
make a point of visiting all the developing countries,
especially those in Africa.

23. Uganda welcomed the initiative taken by the President
of the World Bank to send the Pearson Commission on
International Development to discuss the role of the World
Bank in meeting the challenge of economic development.
We want to see other organizations, such as the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, following
this example. We in Uganda are confident that industrialization 
is essential to our development. We are therefore most
anxious to see the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization functioning effectively, making itself familiar
with our programmes and actively assisting us to meet the
challenge of development.

24. We consider that there is great potential in Africa for
the good of mankind. In order fully to utilize this potential,
the world must take Africa seriously. In the case of the
problems that face us in southern Africa, we expect
co-operation and understanding. In the Nigerian conflict we
expect permanent members of the Security Council to be
on the side of peace. In the case of economic development,
we expect the developed countries not to build obstacles
and apply restrictive measures but to be the vanguard for
increased trade and co-operation between developed and
developing countries. The future of mankind is interdependent 
and no section can be left behind and ignored
without seriously affecting the well-being and prosperity of
the rest. This is the only way we can make the Second
United Nations Development Decade meaningful.