20. Madam President, I should
like to congratulate you on your election to the high office
of President of the General Assembly and to express our
confidence that under your able guidance the Assembly will
succeed in solving the important problems confronting it.

21. We associate ourselves with the condolences expressed
here in connexion with the death of Mr. Emilio Arenales,
who presided over the previous session.

22. The processes of contemporary international life are
complex and contradictory, and this is fully reflected by
the debate which is taking place in this hall. The speakers
are representatives of States with dissimilar social and
economic systems, with different outlooks and different
problems and needs. Yet nearly all of us seem to agree that
the world situation is characterized by acute tension and
that developments in international relations have reached a
dangerous stage.

23. As though expressing our accumulated common alarm
and concern, the Secretary-General stresses in his annual
report [A/7601/Add.1, para. 41] that the “world now
stands at a most critical crossroads” and calls for special
efforts for the maintenance of peace.

24. The time has therefore come for the most far-reaching
and, I would say, radical efforts to prevent mankind from
slipping towards a world war and to strengthen world peace
and international security. We, the representatives of the
socialist countries, have a clear-cut goal and absolutely
definite intentions in this respect. In this connexion, I
should like to quote a highly important extract from the
“Appeal in Defence of Peace” adopted by the International
Conference of Communist and Workers’ Parties held in
Moscow in June this year:

“Under all trials, we Communists have retained our
unflinching devotion to Leninist ideas of peace and
friendship among nations. Today as before, we shall strive
towards these lofty goals, which ave common to all
mankind, side by side with all those who oppose the
policy of militarism, aggression and war. To these ends,
we are prepared to develop contacts and to co-operate
with the widest variety of social and political forces.”

25. We see a real threat to peace in the imperialist policy
of activating military blocs and the arms race, in whose
service the latest achievements of technical progress and the
results of the scientific and technical revolution are being
placed. We also see a real threat to peace in the aggressive
imperialist strategy directed against the socialist States and
against socialism as a social and political system. Finally, we
see a real threat to peace in the imperialist policy of
fomenting conflicts and local wars in various parts of the
world, in the suppression of national liberation movements
and in the policy of revanchism, racial discrimination and
apartheid.

26. The Government of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic has instructed us to concentrate our efforts at this
session of the General Assembly on preparing, together
with other delegations, measures directed towards the
prevention of war and the strengthening of universal peace.
We regard this as the primary condition and main prerequisite 
for the solution of all the other problems with which
the United Nations is confronted. That is why we whole-heartedly 
support the proposal of the Soviet Union
concerning the strengthening of international security, set
out in the draft “Appeal to all States of the world”
[A/7654]. It is hardly possible to over-estimate the
political and practical significance of this document, which
can and must become the most important component of
the United Nations programme of action in forthcoming
years. It opens up vast opportunities for co-operation
among States with different political, social and economic
systems on the most burning problems of the day and
creates the necessary conditions for the preparation of
effective plans and the adoption of realistic measures to
prevent mankind from slipping into a world conflict.

27. It is a generally accepted truth that peace is indivisible
and that a breach of peace in one region of the world can
give rise to a chain reaction and to a world-wide conflagration. 
To safeguard international security is to safeguard
peace in every region of our planet.

28. Accordingly, no special proof is needed that the path
to international security in our time lies in the peaceful
settlement of such acute problems as those of Viet-Nam,
the Middle East and Korea. We are all aware that each of
these problems is many-sided, comprises a whole complex
of issues and is a unique blend of contradictions. Each of
these problems requires a specific approach and calls for
specific means of settlement. But they also have something
in common. This common denominator lies in the fact that
imperialism is standing in the way of the Viet-Namese,
Korean and Arab peoples, which at one time were crushed
under the colonialist heel and rose up to fight for their
national liberation, for political and economic independence 
and for the integrity of their native lands and their
national territories. As the result of wars, part of Viet-Nam,
part of Korea and part of the territory of the Arab States
have been occupied by the troops of foreign Powers. That is
a decisive fact and, in the light of that fact, the struggle of
the peoples against interventionists is a just struggle to
which all progressive forces lend their solidarity and support.

29. That is why the United Nations should declare itself in
favour of certain principles which alone can serve as a basis
for achieving and consolidating universal peace. We are
deeply convinced that the most important of these principles 
is the withdrawal of troops from territories occupied
as the result of military action by certain States against
other States and peoples fighting for the independence and
territorial integrity which they have attained as the result of
the collapse of the colonial system. Attempts to bring
about a peaceful settlement by any other means are
ultimately doomed to failure.

30. In this connexion, Viet-Nam provides the most convincing 
and irrefutable proof that in our time the process of
the national and social liberation of peoples cannot be
arrested by means of force, including military force. It is
well known that the war in Viet-Nam has already surpassed
the Second World War with regard to the quantity and
weight of bombs dropped, and the Korean war with regard
to the number of American killed. But what has the United
States achieved? Defeats on the battlefield and increased
isolation on the international scene. The United States of
America has found itself powerless before the courage and
resistance of the Viet-Namese people, before its will and
resolve to ensure the victory of its just cause and to expel
the foreign invaders and before the active international
solidarity of the socialist States and of all peace-loving
forces.

31. We recently heard from this rostrum an appeal to the
126 Members of the United Nations for efforts through the
diplomatic channel to persuade the Government of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam to hasten the end of the
war. We do not, however, recall the United States of
America making any appeal for advice to all Members of
the United Nations at the time it began its aggression on
Viet-Namese territory. But that is not the point at issue,
particularly since those who dragged the American people
into this war obviously expected a different turn of events.

32. The point is that there is no need to persuade the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and
of the Republic of South Viet-Nam of anything whatsoever.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the National Liberation Front of South Viet-Nam have
agreed to negotiate with the United States of America and
have submitted a programme for the solution of the
Viet-Nam problem which fully corresponds to the principles 
of the 1954 Geneva Agreements and meets the
national aspirations of the Viet-Namese people and the
interests of peace throughout the world. If there is any
need to persuade anyone of anything, it is the United States
of America that has to be persuaded of the need for the
complete and unconditional withdrawal of its troops and
those of its allies from South Viet-Nam, so as to enable the
Viet-Namese people to settle its own affairs in its own
territory. The people of Viet-Nam is fighting to defend its
native land and is thus exercising the sacred and inalienable
right of all peoples to self-defence.

33. The United States of America declares that, at the
Paris talks, it is willing to discuss all problems except one,
namely, the right of the people of South Viet-Nam to
determine its own future without external interference. But
there is one and only one instance of interference in the
affairs of Viet-Nam and that is American interference. And
there is one and only one means of eliminating interference
with the self-determination of the Viet-Namese people,
namel, the withdrawal of the troops of the United States
of America and its allies from this country. The sooner this
takes place, the better for the Viet-Namese people, for the
United States of America and for peace throughout the
world.

34. So far as the Ukrainian SSR is concerned, it is
wholeheartedly on the side of the heroic Viet-Namese
people. We are convinced that its just cause will triumph.
The workers of Viet-Nam, true to the precepts of the
President of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, Comrade 
Ho Chi Minh, that outstanding leader of the international 
Communist, workers’ and national liberation movement, 
will carry their struggle for the happy future of their
country to a victorious conclusion

35. Although the United Nations has been dealing with
the Korean problem for over twenty years, tension in and
around Korea is not easing, but, on the contrary, is
becoming more acute. Why is the Korean nation still
divided, despite its clearly expressed desire for the unification 
of the country? Why does the situation in Korea still
represent a threat to universal peace? It is because of
flagrant outside interference in the affairs of the Korean
nation, which. was liberated from colonial dependence as a
result of the Second World War. The armed forces of the
United States of America continue to occupy South Korea.

36. The Ukrainian SSR, together with the other socialist
countries and a number of Afro-Asian States, has submitted
to the General Assembly for discussion an item entitled
“Withdrawal of United States and all other foreign forces
occupying South Korea under the flag of the United
Nations”. We appeal to all those who are struggling for the
national liberation of peoples from the imperialist yoke and
to all those who support the ideals of the United Nations in
deeds, not in words, to take a decisive stand against the
continued military occupation of South Korea. The path to
peace in that peninsule will not be opened until there are
no interventionists in the southern part of Korea, just as
there is not a single foreign soldier in the northern part of
the country. Can there be a task and purpose more in
keeping with the principles of the United Nations than that
of giving the Korean people an opportunity to settle its
domestic affairs by itself, without external interference?

37. The United Nations has the duty to play a decisive
part in the establishment of peace in the Middle East and in
ensuring the security of all its peoples.

38. Nearly two years have passed since the Security
Council adopted its well-known resolution [242 (1967)].
Instead of using this resolution to bring about a peaceful
settlement, Israel, intoxicated with chauvinistic dreams, has
completely sabotaged the efforts of the United Nations’
throughout this period. It continues to occupy Arab
territory and to provoke incessant exchanges of fire and
armed clashes in the areas of the Suez Canal, the river
Jordan and the Golan heights. Its acts of armed provocation
have lately become more frequent and are assuming an
increasingly dangerous and threatening form.

39. It is perfectly obvious that this provocative behaviour
by the Israeli aggressors would not be possible but for the
fact that Israel has enjoyed and continues to enjoy
protection and support from the United States of America.
The United States is not only giving political and economic
aid to the Israeli aggressors, but is continuing to supply
them with arms. Israel recently received from the United
States aircraft of the most modern type which are being
used for pirate raids against Arab countries.

40. It is therefore not surprising that the representatives of
Israel behave so insolently here in the United Nations. The
statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs during the
general debate [1757th meeting] proved Israel’s unwillingness 
to take United Nations decisions into account. The
main object of that statement seemed to be to prove that
the United Nations is not in a position — is not able — to solve
the problems of the Middle East.

41. Israeli leaders often make speeches about their desire
for peace and security, but these are empty words. If the
real aim is to promote the peace and security of the
countries of that region, the main and essential prerequisite
for this is the liberation of the occupied territories. But
Israel prefers to follow a different and extremely dangerous
course, that of consolidating its annexation of foreign
territories. Its appeals for “direct negotiations” while parts
of the territory of Arab countries are still occupied simply
represent a manoeuvre to camouflage its refusal to comply
with the Security Council decision.

42. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR considers it
essential to make renewed efforts to end the critical
situation in the Middle East.

43. The consultations between the four great Powers
which are permanent members of the Security Council and
the efforts of Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, the representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, have
shown that to leave the situation in the Middle East as it
now is would be to endanger world peace. The Government
of the United Arab Republic at one time submitted
constructive proposals for a stage-by-stage implementation
of the Security Council resolution. The Soviet Government
has also taken the initiative in drawing up proposals
designed to promote a political settlement in the Middle
East. Responsibility for the fact that no appreciable results
have yet been achieved lies wholly with Israel and its
protectors.

44. Israeli leaders are not defending the right of their State
to an independent national existence, but are trying to
retain the Arab territories they have seized. It is the duty of
the United Nations to put an end to this, to support
constructive efforts and to promote a political settlement in
that region.

45. During the First and Second World Wars, the Ukraine
was the scene of fierce fighting and was subjected to
German occupation. In their struggle against the aggressor,
the Ukrainian people lost many millions of their sons and
daughters and suffered enormous material damage. That
fact alone should suffice to show how deep is our concern
for the establishment of a system of collective security in
Europe. The Government of the Ukrainian SSR is a firm
advocate of regional security systems, based on the common 
efforts of all the States in the regions concerned. We
are compelled to draw attention to the absurdity of a
situation in which certain States wish to exclude the
German Democratic Republic, whose twentieth anniversary
will be celebrated in a few days’ time, from decisions on
European affairs and from participation in international life.

46. This ostrich-like policy with regard to a State whose
establishment marked a turning-point in European history
gravely hampers the cause of the peace and security of
nations. Since the earliest days of its existence, the German
Democratic Republic has considered that it has a national
mission and a responsibility to the peoples of Europe to
ensure that war can never again be unleashed from German
soil. It has declared itself in favour of collective security in
Europe, of a stable world order and of general disarmament. 
In all its practical activities, it carries into effect the
ideals of peace, progress and socialism.

47. The peace-loving policy of the German Democractic
Republic is earning it increasing authority and respect. The
German workers’ and peasants’ State is also gaining
increasing recognition in international law. Its foreign
political, economic and cultural relations are being strengthened. 
That is why we are strongly in favour of giving the
German Democratic Republic its rightful place in the
United Nations.

48. The main condition for peace and security on the
European continent is recognition of the inviolability of the
existing frontiers in Europe, including the Oder-Neisse line
and the frontiers between the two German States, the
German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany.

49. But this, together with other political realities of
modern Europe, is something they do not wish to recognize
in Bonn. The policy of Greater German chauvinism,
militarism and revanchism which is being pursued by the
ruling circles of the Federal Republic of Germany, hard
though they may try to conceal the fact, is still one of the
main sources of tension on the European continent. It is
this policy which is providing a propitious background for
the resurgence of fascism, with its present shock force, the
National Democratic Party.

50. It is an inescapable fact that, a quarter of a century
after the defeat of the fascist Reich, there have been
flagrant violations of the obligations laid down in the
Potsdam Agreements concerning the need for a consistent
struggle against attempts to revive militaristic, revanchist
and nazi activities in any form whatsoever on German soil.

51. The lessons of history cannot and must not be
forgotten. We cannot stand by dispassionately while those
very forces which plunged Europe and the whole world into
the maelstrom of the Second World War grow in strength.
The peoples of Europe know from the experience of their
own history what the result of a policy of appeasing nazism
can be.

52. We note with satisfaction that an awareness of the
dangers of nazi ideology and practice has manifested itself
in the United Nations. On the initiative of the Ukraine and
Poland, the Commission on Human Rights, at its recent
twenty-fifth session, adopted a resolution calling upon all
States to take effective measures for the complete prohibition 
of nazi, neo-nazi and racist organizations and groups
and for their prosecution in the courts. I should like to
express the hope that the General Assembly will approve
that decision at its twenty-fourth session.

53. The Ukrainian people supports the policy of the
countries of the socialist community directed towards
securing all-European co-operation and the appeal by the
States members of the Warsaw Treaty to all European
countries for the convening of an all-European conference
on problems of security and peaceful co-operation. Our
delegation is convinced that the adoption by the General
Assembly of the “Appeal to all States of the world” to
approve and support the idea of establishing effective
regional security systems would intensify efforts to this end.
This could only be of benefit to the cause of peace.

54. Disarmament problems are in the foreground at this
session of the General Assembly, as at previous sessions.
Nothing can relegate them to the background, for the
means of mass destruction which have been stockpiled
more than suffice to destroy all life on earth. The urgent
need to put an end to the unbridled arms race is perfectly
obvious. Nearly all the speakers in this hall have made this
point quite convincingly.

55. We attach great importance to the conclusion of
agreements on the limitation of the arms race and on
disarmament, especially on such problems as the prohibition 
of the use of nuclear weapons, the cessation of their
production, the limitation and elimination of stockpiles of
such weapons, the prohibition of underground tests, the
establishment of nuclear-free zones, the elimination of
military bases in the territory of other States and the
prohibition of the use of the sea-bed and ocean floor for
military purposes.

56. We note with satisfaction that the United Nations had
adopted the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons [General Assembly resolution 2373 (XXII)]. In
advocating its entry into force as soon as possible, we were
guided by the belief that it can become an important link in
a chain of measures leading to nuclear disarmament. But
the fact that a number of potential nuclear States are still
refraining from acceding to the Non-Proliferation Treaty is
creating serious difficulties. We are particularly concerned
by the attitude of the Federal Republic of Germany, where
highly influential circles are trying to obtain access to
nuclear weapons.

57. The Ukrainian delegation considers that this session of
the General Assembly should appeal to all States to sign
and ratify the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons as soon as possible.

58. An important aspect of the disarmament problem is
the question of chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons. We all know how alarmed world public opinion
was by recent reports on the further intensification by
certain States of the race for chemical and bacteriological
(biological) weapons and on the accumulation of stockpiles
of these weapons in the territories of other States.

59. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR agrees with the
following main conclusion drawn in the Secretary-General’s
report on chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons
and the effects of their possible use:

“Were these weapons ever to be used on a large scale in
war, no one could predict how enduring the effects would
be, and how they would affect the structure of society
and the environment in which we live.”

60. The Government of the Ukrainian SSR consistently
and resolutely advocates the prohibition of the use of
chemical and bacteriological methods of warfare, the
accession of all States to the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the
strict application of that Protocol. But this is no longer
enough. The time has come for measures of a different
character.

61. Together with other socialist countries, the Ukrainian
SSR has submitted to the General Assembly a draft
convention on the prohibition of the development, production 
and stockpiling of chemical and bacteriological (biological) 
weapons and on the destruction of such weapons
[A/7655]. We are deeply convinced that the adoption and
implementation of such a convention will eliminate the
threat of the outbreak of a chemical and bacteriological
war, will promote the strengthening of the peace and
security of nations and will create a favourable political
climate for the solution of other disarmament problems.

62. In seeking to unite the efforts of all States and peoples
to strengthen international security, we cannot overlook
the vitally important problems of the final elimination of
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations. We consider
it essential to take effective international action in support
of the patriots of Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau),
Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa, and in support of all
oppressed peoples. No effort should be spared to ensure
that 1970, the year when the United Nations will observe
the tenth anniversary of the proclamation of the Declaration 
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, should become a milestone on the road
towards the full implementation of the Declaration. This
aim would be furthered by the Assembly’s adoption at this
session of the “Appeal to all States of the world”
[A/7654], which stresses the need for the cessation of all
measures for the suppression of the liberation movements
of the peoples still under colonial rule and for the granting
of independence to all such peoples.

63. In the desire to consolidate their sovereignty, many
independent States of Asia, Africa and Latin America are
striving to overcome their economic backwardness and to
create an independent national economy. How should this
problem be solved? What means and forms of social
development should be chosen? What role should be
played by international economic relations? What contribution 
should the United Nations make to the preparation 
and execution of social and economic development
programmes throughout the world? The immediacy of
these problems is beyond all doubt.

64. The concerns and needs of the developing countries
are familiar and comprehensible to the Ukrainian SSR.
Many of the problems which are now causing anxiety to
these States confronted us in one way or another and were
solved in the not too distant past. A little over 50 years ago,
the economy of the Ukraine was grasped in the tentacles of
foreign capital, which controlled 70 per cent of coal and
ore production, 90 per cent of pig iron production, 70 per
cent of manganese production and so forth. The farmers
suffered from the survivals of feudalism and from merciless
capitalist exploitation. Most of the people were illiterate,
and the necessary capital and skilled personnel were lacking
for the development of industry and transport and for
undertaking scientific research and applying its results in
production.

65. The situation has since undergone radical changes. We
carried out a revolution, but vast material resources were
required and people had to be trained to develop our
economy, science and culture. We boldly embarked on the
road to social and economic transformations. The guiding
principle was reliance on our own sources of development.
As a result, during the years of Soviet rule, the volume of
industrial output has increased 52-fold; Ukrainian products
are now exported to 88 countries and the Ukrainian SSR is
taking part in the construction of 183 industrial and
educational centres in the developing countries. About
3 million experts are now working in the national economy
and the number of scientific workers exceeds 100,000.
Every third person employed is studying to improve his
professional qualifications and general education.

66. For this reason, the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic feels obliged to make a number of
comments on certain economic development problems and
to share its experience, some aspects of which, in its
Opinion, might usefully be taken into account in the
preparation of national and international development
programmes.

67. We consider that international efforts should be
concentrated on the consolidation of developing countries
independence, the rapid elimination of the economic
aftermath of colonialism, the struggle against neo-colonialist 
trends, and the economic, social and cultural
advancement of these countries. The United Nations should
promote the establishment of an international atmosphere
in which it would be impossible for neo-colonialist forces to
prevent the peoples of the developing countries from
carrying out fundamental social and economic changes and
democratic land reforms, abolishing feudal and non-feudal
relations, ending the dominance of foreign monopolies, and
reviving and developing their national culture.

68. The main condition for successful economic development 
is the exercise by the peoples of full sovereignty over
the natural resources of their countries. We cannot regard as
normal a situation in which the foreign indebtedness of
countries liberated from colonial domination increases year
by year and now amounts to nearly $50,000 million, with
loan repayments already accounting for two thirds of the
new influx of public foreign capital. This complicates the
foreign exchange situation of the developing countries,
increases their financial dependence and deprives them of
vast sources of capital accumulation for the development of
their own economies.

69. The shortage of qualified national personnel is a
serious obstacle to the economic advancement of many
Asian and African countries. The problem of training
personnel to accelerate industrialization in the developing
countries has already been discussed in the United Nations.
As one of the sponsors of the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic has
given practical evidence of its desire to give the necessary
aid to the countries of the third world. Nationals of these
countries are being trained in sixty higher educational and
technical institutions of the Republic. Permanent United
Nations courses for training metallurgists are being conducted 
in the town of Zapirozhye. During the past eight
years, over 10,000 specialists from the developing countries
have been trained or have improved their qualifications in
the Ukraine.

70. International efforts should be continued in this field.
Our delegation therefore considers it essential to intensify
activities to promote the training of higher- and intermediate-level 
specialists for the developing countries, especially 
those who can be employed in the production sector,
as well as specialists in the ordinary trades and occupations.

71. These are our views on some of the economic
problems which will play a prominent part in the discussions 
at this session.

72. The interests of strengthening peace and international
security call for an increase in the role and significance of
the United Nations as an instrument of international
communication and its responsibility for the solution of
urgent problems. What is needed to enable the United
Nations to fulfil this high mission effectively is not a reform
of the Organization or a review of its Charter, but the
utilization of all the political opportunities and resources
embodied in that Charter, the strict and undeviating
observance of its letter and spirit by all Members of the
United Nations without exception and the transformation
of the Organization into a genuinely universal body.

73. Important steps in this connexion should be an
enhancement of the role and efficacy of the Security
Council as the organ on which primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security is
conferred by the Charter, the further study of ways and
means of increasing the efficiency of United Nations
peace-keeping operations and the intensification of work on
the definition of aggression and on agreed principles
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States.

74. Recognition of the importance of the present stage in
the Organization’s development should be translated into
new collective efforts, new initiatives and new activities.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations should
serve as a further incentive to this end.

75. The proposals of the Soviet Union on the strengthening 
of international security, as well as other proposals
which the socialist countries have submitted for consideration 
at this session of the General Assembly, serve as
examples of that very approach. Not only are these
proposals not directed against any State or group of States
but, on the contrary, conforming as they do to the basic
and vital interests of all peoples, they are directed towards
the maximum unification of the efforts of all States
without exception with a view to achieving and strengthening 
universal peace. We hope that their full discussion will
prove fruitful and will serve the purpose of the United
Nations.

76. The Government of the Soviet Ukraine has consistently 
followed the precepts of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, who
declared in the early days of Soviet power that “...we
promise the workers and peasants to do everything for
peace. And we will do it.” Our delegation intends to exert
the maximum effort during this session to promote the
strengthening of universal peace and the security of nations.
This fully corresponds to the aspirations of our people,
which is preparing, together with all progressive men and
women, to celebrate the centenary of Lenin, a man whose
name is linked with the most important events of our era
and a tireless fighter for social progress, for the liberation of
the working masses from oppression and for the triumph of
peace and fraternity among the peoples on this earth.