I should like first to express Cuba’s deep satisfaction at the election of so eminent a person to the Presidency of this session of the General ‘ Assembly.
49.	The foreign policy of the Republic of Cuba is based on a high concept of democratic coexistence, founded on the principle of economic, social and political co-operation between States and the co-ordination of their interests within the framework of the United Nations, consistent with their regional arrangements. It is Cuba’s hope that this coexistence will be marked by harmony and that injustice, aggression and the violation of rights will be prevented and made good by the application of the concepts and the use of the means available to Member States to give effect to the obligations they have assumed and to fulfil the principles to which they have declared their allegiance in the United Nations Charter.
50.	The position of Cuba is well-known through its efforts in the United Nations. Cuba has contributed, enthusiastically, steadily and to the best of its ability, to what it considered to be its best development, consistently advocating the adoption of principles likely to ensure the stability and integrity of nations through respect for their sovereignty, the recognition of the right of peoples to self-determination, and the observance of human rights.
51.	Moreover, Cuba demonstrated its vital concern that the United Nations should be endowed with a proper democratic, legal and moral structure when, following the lengthy negotiations that brought the Organization into being and to which Cuba made a distinct contribution, it foresaw what harmful effects the international Organization would suffer from a measure which discriminated against the sovereignty of Member States by making it possible for one State, at will, to override the majority wishes of the rest. In earlier days, prompted by the same spirit of cooperation and recognizing that the development of diplomacy and international relations made it imperative to establish an international organization, Cuba worked assiduously in the old League of Nations, the body which, abandoned and undermined by some States and mortally attacked by others — circumstances which decided its ultimate fate — had been intended to meet a need which is now being met more adequately by the United Nations.
52.	Here I may point out that, in participating in the League, Cuba always maintained its concept of the importance of regional arrangements within the international framework. Thus it gave its full support to the inter-American system from the very outset and has continued to do so through the inter-American Conferences. Through the juridical and constitutional structure of the Organization of American States, it is contributing effectively to the promotion and affirmation of the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations.
53.	Coexistence, on behalf of which every State surrenders a limited portion of its authority in order to ensure greater protection and preservation of its sovereignty, is founded on international law, which is the basis of relations between States for the harmonious attainment of their national objectives within the international framework and, today, for the further purpose of ensuring the protection of the individual and the exercise of human rights.
54.	But law is not an institution which comes into being spontaneously. It does not arise merely from intentions and desires; it cannot simply be legislated into being. In order to exist and to fulfil its basic purposes, it must come about as a result of the exigencies of life and of the struggles and experiences of peoples. It must also reflect the practical trends which lead to progress and, if it is to prevail and fulfil its function, it must rest solidly on social justice, a well-ordered economy and civic education.
55.	"Law, which has been transgressed and violated so often in the course of history when politics prevailed over legal principle and force was used to overwhelm reason, always resumed its pre-eminence, for when a legal order is based on justice, it represents the final bulwark against abuse and constitutes a guarantee of stability for all States.
56.	As is well known, law is not a static institution; it is essentially dynamic: it seizes upon developments favouring human progress and consolidates them in the form of legal principles. Nevertheless, the trend in international law is away from classical customary law towards written law — that is, the law built up by conventions, treaties, protocols and agreements and those documents which supplement such conventions, providing a guide and key for their interpretation, namely, the declarations, resolutions and recommendations formulated by international conferences and organizations. Accordingly, for the greater protection and security of States, collectively and individually, and of mankind itself, it is imperative in international relations to respect and defend law and to allow it to develop adequately so that it may fulfil its purposes.
57.	A well-ordered economy based on justice, adapted to the needs and resources of the juridical community of nations, is essential if law is to prevail and represents a vital factor for the very survival of mankind. Bearing that in mind, Cuba maintains that the principles of law must take into account the interdependence of economies, must recognize the need for properly organized production and must provide reasonable protection for the industrial and agricultural development of States. Such principles characterize Cuba’s domestic legislation, which embodies the agreements concluded by the world bodies and regional organizations in which Cuba participates, and in which it, in turn, works for the adoption of the economic standards I have described.
58.	Affirmation of spiritual values and of social justice is equally essential for the proper operation of a legal system, both in relations among individuals and in the community of nations, since life requires more than the satisfaction of material needs. Coexistence, the ideal towards which the United Nations strives, demands respect for human dignity, without discrimination on grounds of religion, race or sex, the security necessary for human beings to earn their living honourably and receive a fair return for their labour, protection of health, assistance to the needy, equality before law and the prohibition of forced labour, which transforms human beings into slaves and makes humanity take a step backwards in history.
59.	Cuba, whose legislation embodies the most advanced social achievements, has a deep respect for human rights as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which it supported, and is an advocate of measures which will help to establish those rights more strongly day by day.
60.	Culture, which is of immeasurable social value in promoting the intellectual development of individuals and communities and plays a major part in shaping the minds of new generations, is also of vital importance in bringing about mutual understanding among peoples. Cultural exchanges, through which we learn how the people of other countries live and react, are a decisive factor in creating mutual understanding, promoting goodwill and contributing to better and friendlier relations and co-operation among nations. To dam those currents of cultural exchange is to create a disturbance in the international community; its only purpose can be to keep peoples in ignorance of the advantages and achievements of other civilizations and to conceal from them their own deficiencies. We must promote the free exchange of ideas, freedom of information and the easy access of one country to another, not unilaterally but on a reciprocal basis and not for subversive purposes.
61.	It is therefore of the greatest importance that peoples should learn to know each other better if we are to build closer spiritual bonds among them and make them aware of the similarity of their aspirations and of the congruity of their interests when they are directed towards progress and the common welfare.
62.	Having set forth these principles and general considerations, I shall now turn to some of the items on the agenda of this ninth session of the United Nations General Assembly.
63.	The development of atomic energy is a matter of such magnitude that it dwarfs all other subjects on our agenda. Its use will decide the welfare or destruction of mankind. The inclusion in our agenda of the item entitled “International co-operation in developing the peaceful uses of atomic energy” [item 67] is a ray of hope in the gloomy atmosphere of threats of aggression against the freedom and the very survival of peoples. Any Member State which tries to prevent that hope- from being realized, as has been the case in the past and as has recently occurred in London with respect to the nobly-conceived plan of President Eisenhower, would be committing a serious crime against humanity. Cuba hopes that a fruitful understanding will be reached. The future of the world depends upon it.
64.	Meanwhile, to safeguard the international community — one of the basic purposes of the United Nations — Cuba, like other States, is anxious to strengthen our system of collective security as a means of enforcing respect for the law of the Organization should there be any attempt to violate it. The need to revise and strengthen the collective security system was clearly shown when the organ of the United Nations upon which the Charter places primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace proved incapable of fulfilling its function.
65.	The resolution “Uniting for Peace” [377 (V)] has added a vital element towards the effective operation of the collective security system in that it confers upon the General Assembly, the representative organ of the United Nations, the power to deal with cases in which the Security Council has been unable to discharge the responsibilities incumbent upon it under the Charter.
66.	The importance of this reform lies in the fact that it will be able to prevent the recurrence in the future of the regrettable situation in which, for lack of unanimity on the part of the permanent members of the Security Council, the United Nations was unable to take the action deemed proper by the great majority in matters affecting the peace and security of States. The Cuban delegation will therefore support all action designed to strengthen collective security, provided that such action is in keeping with the cardinal principles and objectives of the resolution “Uniting for Peace”.
67.	There is another subject I must mention because it is closely connected with international peace and security and because its omission leaves a gap in the Charter: namely, the definition of aggression. The General Assembly itself recognized [resolution 599 (VI)] in 1951 that, “although the existence of the crime of aggression may be inferred from the circumstances peculiar to each particular case, it is nevertheless possible and desirable, with a view to ensuring international peace and security and to developing international criminal law, to define aggression by reference to the elements which constitute it”.
68.	Consistent with the position it has steadily maintained inside and outside the United Nations, Cuba concurs with this judgment and hopes that the spirit of co-operation will prevail, so that, in the light of earlier studies, reports and decisions, the Assembly will be able at this session to agree on a definition of this crime, the most serious crime against the peace and security of mankind.
69.	The Cuban delegation will also give its unequivocal support to the discussion and adoption at this session of the Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind, as also to any positive action on the statute for an international criminal court. We consider that the United Nations must examine and define all other offences, in addition to aggression, which may disturb or endanger international peace and security. It is necessary not only to ensure future observance of the principle nullum crimen sine lege, but also to provide criminal sanctions for acts and omissions injurious to the interests of States and to basic human rights. At the same time, the establishment of an international court competent to deal with these offences and to impose adequate penalties for them would ensure proper respect in the future for the principles of criminal justice recognized by all civilized nations.
70.	In economic matters, the United Nations must pursue its efforts with increased energy, so that the resolutions adopted for the purpose of remedying the present precarious situation of many countries may bear fruit and that the lofty objectives of the United Nations may become a reality.
71.	At the present session, the General Assembly will consider the establishment of an international finance corporation to help private enterprise in the underdeveloped countries and of a special fund for grants-in-aid and long-term low-interest loans, and also the question of the international flow of private capital for the economic development of the under-developed countries.
72.	Careful consideration of these points and the subsequent incorporation of those two institutions in the economic system of the United Nations and the adoption of more adequate provisions with regard to private capital would, by promoting the expansion of industry and agriculture and, in turn, a rise of employment and an improvement in social conditions, effectively contribute towards a solution of some of the critical problems which beset the world. That solution depends on the economic and social stability of nations and on the aid they receive towards the steady development of their resources to meet the growing needs of mankind. This would also benefit, in particular, the countries which export raw materials and whose economy is under-developed, countries which languish for lack of the necessary means and co-operation and for lack of an international policy enabling them to establish a tempo of economic development that would keep pace with world progress. This would also improve somewhat the position of States which in the past were urged to co-operate in difficult times by increasing certain types of production. In order to satisfy urgent needs in the defence of democracy, these countries had to transform their economies and step up their production, only to discover that, unfortunately, once the circumstances prompting the requests for cooperation had disappeared, they were facing a general crisis because there was no longer a market for their products.
73.	It may also be opportune to recall at this juncture the proposal, made and reiterated by Cuba, for the elimination of double taxation. Such a measure would stimulate the flow of private capital towards the underdeveloped countries. Our delegation holds the view that capital exporting nations should eliminate double taxation, or, if this is not feasible, seek to attenuate it by means of bilateral agreements. We therefore feel that the United Nations should continue to study this question and should consider recommendations to that end, so that beneficial agreements may be reached in the future.
74.	With regard to social affairs, Cuba will support the adoption of the covenants which are to give effect to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Cuba wants these rights to be defined as broadly as possible and to be accompanied by provisions that will ensure their becoming a reality throughout the world. In my general remarks I spoke of the right of peoples to self-determination, which is so closely allied to human rights and which Cuba supports in the hope that, by methods to be agreed upon, each human community may acquire the right to choose freely its form of political organization and its government.
75.	In cultural matters, in line with the governing principles I have expounded, we support the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and its work, so that education, knowledge and culture may be carried to all comers of the world, so that the peoples may throw off the burden of ignorance and be able to make an intelligent choice of what is to their own best interest, and so that each person, being given an opportunity for self-development, may make a positive contribution to the community.
76.	I may mention that the Regional Centre of UNESCO in the Western Hemisphere is in Cuba. The Centre represents a most effective aspect of the work of this specialized agency, which must of necessity rely on regional bodies well acquainted with the needs and the intellectual and cultural characteristics of the areas in which they work. Their reports and activities facilitate the work of the central agency which, being far away, cannot fully appreciate the psychological elements involved and the wishes and potentialities of these territories.
77.	We are able to say with pride that, in spite of the financial difficulties it is facing, Cuba has achieved notable progress in the economic, social and cultural fields. After being obliged to reduce by more than 25 per cent the production of its basic commodity, sugar, a production which it had expanded, in a spirit of cooperation, to meet the requirements of the last war, Cuba has enacted the necessary legislation to reconstruct its economy, to stimulate the social programmes outlined in its Constitution and to help to make education and culture accessible to all the inhabitants of the island.
78.	This legislation relates to the following institutions and measures: the Rural Credit Association and the Bank for Agricultural and Industrial Development, which gives credit to farmers; the National Executive Commission of the Local, Urban and Rural Employers’ Associations, which supervises the construction of roads linking the production areas with the centres of consumption and distribution; development of mining as a source of wealth, employment and higher wages and establishment of the National Executive Commission of Agricultural and Mining Co-operatives, which promotes the development of the mining industry; the Programme of Economic and Social Development, which finances irrigation projects, hydroelectric plants, harbour installations, plantations, mines, etc.; the Industrial Stimulation Act, granting new firms which are being established in the country exemption from certain taxes; the National Finance Corporation, with capital subscribed by the National Bank of Cuba, established for the total or partial financing of public works; the National Housing Commission, which will make possible mass construction of cheap housing for workers and employees; the organization of free and democratic trade unions and employers’ associations, which between them ensure a proper balance in all matters affecting capital and labour, and which, with the watchful co-operation of the State, are giving increasingly satisfactory results.
79.	In addition to numerous hospitals, workers’ maternity homes, homes for the aged and children, we have the following institutions, whose names explain their purpose: the National Organization of Children’s Dispensaries; the National Organization for the Rehabilitation of Invalids; the Institution for Assistance to the Children, the Aged, the Handicapped and the Sick; the National Organization of School and Public Dining Rooms.
80.	I must also mention some recently established educational and cultural centres, such as the State Universities of Oriente and Las Villas, in addition to two set up by private enterprise, and many newly constructed rural and urban schools and vocational centres offering programmes adapted to the needs of our economic development. The economic, social and cultural policy of the Cuban Government is inspired throughout by an unwavering desire to help the Cuban people achieve higher standards of living and a greater measure of happiness by giving them that security which arises from a solid economy and a just and democratic social organization, with equal safeguards and opportunities for all.
81.	Before concluding these remarks, I wish to recall that General Fulgencio Batista, the President of Cuba, who is adamantly opposing the infiltration and subversive activities of Communists in Cuba, said in his monumental statement of 12 September, during the electoral campaign preceding the general elections to be held on 1 November: “We cannot hope to achieve a total and complete defeat of communism unless part of our campaign is devoted to the long struggle against ignorance and poverty in the absence of which communism is seldom successful.” I might add that this strikingly apt remark eloquently reflects a cardinal objective of the Cuban Government’s policy.
82.	This general ideology and these concepts, as also the stand we have taken on specific items of the General Assembly’s agenda, are an earnest of Cuba’s cooperation and of its contribution to the constructive work of the United Nations, whose common ideals and unity of action are more than ever essential now that the fate of mankind depends upon the moral forces and material possibilities of joint defence against that which threatens its liberty and progress and, indeed, its democratic existence. The plans and stratagems which are being laid to lead the world into conflict and conflagration must be thwarted for the general good. This can be done only by agreement reached within this great Organization, where the nations of the world are met for the noble and lofty purposes of preventing the forces of evil from exercising their pernicious action on States and individuals, and of attaining and strengthening peace — not a peace founded on the oppression of peoples and individuals, but one in which justice, mankind’s highest ideal, shall prevail.
