Mr. President, I wish first of all to congratulate you on your election. The Greek delegation is glad to see that the conduct of the proceedings of the ninth session of the General Assembly has been entrusted to a person who represents the European spirit in its most universal form. My delegation wishes you, in the performance of your duties, all the success which you deserve.
141.	During the general debate with which each regular session of the General Assembly opens, it is customary for most of the speakers on this rostrum to draw up what might be called the balance-sheet of peace. This balance-sheet usually consists of an appraisal of the past and of an expression of hope for the future. It is not always easy to judge events in which we ourselves are caught up, and it is even harder to isolate in these events the objective truths which may be helpful in guiding the development of the international situation steadily in the right direction.
142.	Every individual, acting in accordance with his own views, interests and beliefs, forms his own opinion of events, but this opinion is not always shared by everybody else. This means that facts, which each of us sees in his own way and on his own terms, rarely offer a common ground for understanding and action.
143.	That is why, after noting the facts as they occurred and the various opinions of all who express serious judgments on them, we must look for some other factor which could serve as a common denominator and a better guide in our efforts to establish peace. This factor can be none other than international law and respect for the principles on which that law is founded.
144.	For my part, although not wishing to interpret recent developments in the international situation one way or another, I feel bound to admit that the steady decline in the number of armed conflicts creates, at first sight, a favourable impression. Less blood is now being shed. That may be considered as a noteworthy achievement of peace on the march.
145.	That by itself should not, however, be a reason for premature optimism for we should not forget that in many parts of the globe we are still faced with disturbing and tense situations which are potentially so explosive and menacing that all who bear the heavy burden of international responsibilities must be ever vigilant.
146.	Apart, from the great cardinal points which determine the general course of international relations, we should also take note of the efforts to strengthen peace which are made at the regional level. While failures have occurred in some regions, particularly gratifying results have been obtained in others. For example, viewing recent developments in South-East Europe in this light, I take great satisfaction in drawing the General Assembly’s attention to the constructive contributions made to the building of peace by the tripartite Treaty of Alliance signed at Bled on 9 August 1954. It should be emphasized that this treaty, which is purely defensive in its terms and nature, makes the present close and friendly co-operation between Greece, Yugoslavia and Turkey in security matters even more effective. The Governments of these three countries were at pains, furthermore, to bring this treaty into line with the structure of the United Nations in such a way that it is intimately, I might even say organically, related to the relevant Articles of the Charter. The defensive language of the Treaty of Bled and of the corresponding provisions of the Charter testify as to the devotion of the signatory States to the United Nations.
147.	While speaking of matters of special interest to Greece, I should mention the improvement in our relations with Bulgaria. To the extent that the Bulgarian Government manifests its intention of continuing to act in accordance with the rules of international law, we may hope for progressively normal relations between Greece and Bulgaria.
148.	Earlier in my remarks I emphasized that only respect for the fundamental principles — legal and moral — which govern international life can offer a yardstick of the progress made towards peace. The proper aim of our efforts should be the application of these principles. We shall be assisted in our endeavour by the fact that these principles are laid down and consecrated in the United Nations Charter. The road to peace lies through the Charter. This is the road of justice and freedom, of law overcoming arbitrary power, of international co-operation fostered by respect for the fundamental freedoms of all of the general interest prevailing over special interests, of the equal rights of peoples, of respect for the human rights which now have been recognized by the international conscience as the “raw material” of the international community. Without respect for these fundamental principles of freedom and justice it is impossible to establish relations of trust and understanding. Without these principles the United Nations will never be able to fulfil its beneficent mission. Its authority will soon be undermined if the Organization itself does not respect the principles inscribed in its Charter, or if it fails to secure universal respect for them.
149.	In the introduction to his annual report [A/2663] on the work of the United Nations, the Secretary-General raises the problem of the use of the Organization by Members whenever current international problems call for pacific settlement. I must say that in this report, which is particularly noteworthy for its generous spirit and moderation, the Secretary-General offers us extremely useful guidance. When the issue is how to further the cause of peace, one should not exclude in advance any method or procedure likely to lead to this goal. It would however, be helpful if the Member States, realizing the great possibilities and the effective safeguards offered by the United Nations, were always to consider the Organization as the normal and regular channel through which to approach the settlement of international problems and disputes.
150.	Even in cases where, for particular reasons, it seems necessary to avoid the normal procedure of recourse to the United Nations and instead to seek peaceful solutions by other means, it would be most desirable to ensure some co-ordination between the United Nations and action undertaken outside the Organization, if only for the sole purpose of keeping the Organization officially informed of all important developments in international life. Accordingly, in the Secretary-General’s view, the United Nations should not be merely a “tool” in the hands of the international community for working out constructive and peaceful solutions, but, more than that, a virtual mental reflex, a reminder to all persons at all times that the world has now set out on the road to organized co-operation and that this new development in international relations cannot be ignored. The United Nations is tracing the path which international affairs should follow in the future and so far as possible we should not deviate from this path. It is in that spirit that the Greek Government, holding that the fundamental principles of the Charter constitute definite international obligations and pertinent rules of conduct for all, has always placed its trust in the United Nations, the supreme authority and inner conscience of which are represented by the General Assembly.
151.	The General Assembly has a particularly important function to perform in giving effect to the peaceful purposes of the United Nations. Irrespective of the nature of its functions and structure, the General Assembly is the principal United Nations body responsible for the organization of peace. Whether it is regarded as a permanent diplomatic conference or as a political assembly, harbinger, as it were, of the democratic organization of the future, in any case the General Assembly is assuredly the main centre for the development of the international community, one might say the mould of the world of the future; and, unless plunged into suicidal war by blind passion, that world will be built on the rule of law. National communities passed through similar phases before they succeeded in imposing a legal order commanding universal respect on their social groups.
152.	There are, in the General Assembly, positive elements capable of furthering the progressive development of law and respect for certain rules to be followed in the conduct of international affairs. I do not intend to inquire into this question more searchingly, though in so far as it affects the very future of the United Nations, it should be weighed and studied by us. Nevertheless, I should like to mention, as an example, the principle of the equality of all Member States for voting purposes which is not only an emanation of the democratic spirit underlying our Organization, but also a positive element of law. In this connexion we should appreciate the valuable contribution made by the great Powers towards the building of peace when they accepted the principle of equality for voting purposes, for this principle is the motive power in the General Assembly’s proceedings. I need hardly recall that law and the legal order serve the interests of the weak rather than of the strong. It is especially comforting to note that the great Powers are firmly committed to the rule of law; they realize that might is something relative, that the one who is supreme in strength today may fall from his eminence tomorrow, that sometimes the .strong prove to be weak, and the weak strong, and that in any case none is more powerful than all the others together. In this way the rule of law is, in the final analysis, the best safeguard both for the weak and for the strong.
153.	It would, I think, be to the advantage of all Member States, if they wish to strengthen the rule of law within the United Nations, to be guided by certain general considerations, of which I should like to mention two as specially significant. First, the widest possible application of the fundamental principles of the Charter should be sought and guaranteed by all, regardless of any current political or other considerations. We all know the pressure exerted on governmental decisions in all countries by circumstances, necessity and special interests. The principles of the Charter, however, express the common interest, and that interest should never be sacrificed to selfish inclinations or compromise arrangements..
154.	The second consideration is respect for General Assembly resolutions and for the Organization itself on the part of all Member States. In this connexion I cannot help pointing out to you that certain delegations have stated even from this rostrum, that their Governments intended to disregard any action and any resolution adopted by the General Assembly which did not meet their own views or suit their own interests. It is particularly regrettable, and absolutely inadmissible from the point of view of the essential interests of the United Nations, that representatives should come here to show us the “waste-paper basket” to which certain Governments propose to consign the resolutions and recommendations of the General Assembly.
155.	These disturbing demonstrations which deal a serious blow to the prestige and usefulness of the United Nations cannot be overlooked. Presumably all Member States, independently of the legally binding force of this or that resolution, admit that the United Nations has a certain authority which they have undertaken to respect. The United Nations would be threatened with mortal danger should the time come when each Member State recognized as valid only those of the Assembly’s decisions which coincided with the views of its own Government. All Member States, more especially the democratic countries whose Governments are responsible to the people, should weigh the grave responsibility they assume in undermining the authority and prestige of the United Nations.
156.	Viewed in this light this problem calls for the General Assembly’s most earnest attention, and should, in my opinion, be made the subject of an appropriate study with a view to arriving at constructive and generally acceptable solutions. My delegation reserves the right to consult with other delegations in order that the question may be dealt with at a suitable moment in accordance with the interests of the United Nations.
157.	Before concluding I wish to refer to the plan for the reorganization of the Secretariat proposed by the Secretary-General in the final part of the introduction of his report to the General Assembly [A/2663, pp. xiv-xv]. The Secretary-General’s efforts towards better organization, improved output and the implementation of programmes are of considerable importance. Our delegation will sustain and support the Secretary-General in his efforts whenever he needs out backing. The Greek representatives on the Committees which will consider, directly or indirectly, every question connected with the problem, have received instructions to this effect.
158. Lastly, I wish to emphasize particularly that the Greek delegation supports the co-ordination of work and action which should first and foremost be directed towards helping the under-developed countries. In this respect, the Secretary-General has been guided by the primary and predominant interests of the international community, as repeatedly expressed and specified in the relevant General Assembly resolutions. I am convinced that the Secretary-General will find the General Assembly ready to support him fully in his most laudable initiative.
