RAHIM Bey said that the political atmosphere in which the General Assembly was meeting for its fourth session was not what had been hoped for. Tension and anxiety prevailed. After three years of continuous and arduous endeavours to maintain peace and security, the threat of war was still hanging over the world. '
37.	The Berlin crisis, which at the beginning of the third session had been a definite threat to peace, had been successfully handled, but many questions vital to world peace were still pending, and differences among the great Powers were still pronounced. Still greater efforts must, therefore be made during and after the session to attain the ultimate goal of peace and security.
38.	Four years after the cessation of hostilities, peace treaties were yet to be concluded with Germany, Austria, and Japan. The continued inclusion in the Assembly’s agenda of the Greek question and of the questions of the prohibition and control of atomic energy, Korea, Indonesia and the admission of new Members, were signs that the ultimate goal was still far off and that very little progress had been achieved.
39.	In the Near East, an important and strategic area at the crossroads of three continents, the situation was far from reassuring. Signs of discontent, unrest and insecurity were manifest.
40.	On Egypt’s eastern frontier, in Palestine, military operations had come to an end, but misery, dislocation and, instability still prevailed. About one million Arab refugees were still wandering in the desert, driven from their homes, hungry, homeless and in despair.
41.	In Libya, across Egypt’s western frontier, another Arab country was clamouring for its independence and unity after a long period of suffering and oppression. Its inhabitants were looking to the Assembly for the realization of their legitimate aspirations.
42.	Within Egypt itself, the people were beset with anxiety since they could not forget that the Egyptian question was still pending. It had not so far been accorded the solution it deserved in keeping with the spirit and letter of the United Nations Charter and the self-evident rules of justice.
43.	Turning to the Far East, the picture was again one of instability and insecurity. The. Indonesian question was still unsolved. The valiant Chinese nation was suffering from the ravages of a continued war. The Koreans, unfortunately, were also denied their right to unity.
44.	Those clouds of unrest and insecurity in Europe, the Near East and the Far East contained a real menace to the peace of the world. It was only by co-operation in the Assembly that the clouds could be dispelled and an atmosphere of genuine confidence and security created.
45.	The Secretary-General in his report had struck an optimistic note, attributable in the main to the attainment of a marked degree of progress in the economic activities of the United Nations. It was not surprising, however, to hear from time to time of deficiencies in the Organization. The disturbing tendency of the United Nations to yield on certain occasions to the fait accompli was most alarming.
46.	For its part, Egypt would loyally endeavour to contribute to finding a constructive and peaceful settlement of all the problems confronting the Organization.
47.	While not intending to deal in detail with all the important problems on the agenda, Rahim ley would dwell briefly on certain matters of vital interest to the area of the Near East.
48.	The problem of Palestine was of grave concern to Egypt. The partition of that country bore an unfortunate resemblance to other partitions of territory which had taken place before and after 1914, and which had provided some of the darkest pages in the history of international diplomacy. That was evidenced by the past and still prevailing misery of the Holy Land, tom by strife and dissension.
49.	As long as the agonizing problem of the Arab refugees, or indeed, the problem of Palestine itself, remained, there could be no enduring security in the Middle East. As long as that problem, with its many aspects, remained unsolved in accordance with the just principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the General Assembly, real peace and stability would be lacking in that area and, in consequence, throughout the world. In that connexion the Egyptian delegation recalled with regret that even General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 remained unimplemented. In the future, as in the past, Egypt would continue to co-operate with the United Nations in order to achieve a just and definitive solution to the problem and would continue to work constructively for the re-establishment of peace, order and stability in that troubled part of the world.
50.	An equally important question on the agenda was the future of the former Italian colonies. The position of Egypt on that issue was well known. It had been made clear during the debates of the General Assembly and the work of the First Committee at the third session.
51.	The Egyptian delegation remained firm in its determination to press for the unity and independence of Libya. The right of the Libyan people to unity and independence was incontestable. Their maturity for independence was generally recognized and their unity was based on strong ties of religion, race, culture, common history and economic interdependence,
52.	The unity and the independence of Libya was the only solution based on equity. It was wholly consistent with the letter and spirit of the Charter and had the advantage of satisfying the hopes and answering the prayers of the country’s inhabitants. It gave assurance of lasting peace and security in that important area of the Mediterranean.
53.	With regard to the future of the former Italian colonies in East Africa, Egypt would abide by the principles and high ideals of the Charter, which had always determined its past attitude. It would most faithfully take into consideration the interest? of the inhabitants of those territories.
54.	Turning to the Indonesian question, Rahim Bey recalled that Egypt had from the outset recognized the Republic and sincerely sympathized with the legitimate rights and aspirations of the Indonesian people. The Egyptian delegation hoped that the negotiations taking place between the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia, under the auspices of the United Nations and in accordance with the resolution of the Security Council of 28 January 1949 would accomplish a satisfactory result. It trusted that moderation would prevail and that all concerned in the negotiations would show foresight, patience and a true spirit of conciliation.
55.	The Egyptian delegation noted with the deepest regret that because of the existing differences among the great Powers, the Security Council had not been able to create the armed forces envisaged in Article 43 of the Charter.
56.	The Powers referred to in Article 106 of the Charter had so far failed to discharge the responsibilities specified in Article 43. That deficiency required a proper and adequate remedy. The continued lack of an armed force at the disposal of the United Nations could place the Organization in a precarious position similar to that which had frustrated the peace efforts of the League of Nations. Persistent disagreements between the great Powers had further accentuated that regrettable situation and had obstructed agreement, not only on the prohibition and control of atomic energy and other weapons of mass destruction, but also on the reduction and regulation of conventional armaments.
57.	It was one of the main objectives of the United Nations to enlist international co-operation in dealing with the economic problems of the world. The Egyptian delegation appreciated the efforts made by the Organization and its specialized agencies, but it hoped that more positive measures would be initiated in that direction. Economic development was necessary not only in order to raise the standard of living of the people, but also as a fundamental basis for the maintenance of peace.
58.	The expansion of production, world trade and consumption, the. stability and convertibility of currencies, the amplification of the international flow of funds, the availability of experts and technicians, the free exchange of scientific ideas and practical experience, all those were ways and means towards that end. There was no doubt but that the United Nations and the specialized agencies had done much to promote international co-operation but much remained to be done. The Egyptian delegation expressed its hopes for a better and peaceful life for people everywhere, through the assistance to be rendered by the United Nations.
59.	It was the sacred trust of Members to see that the United Nations discharged its responsibilities and did not deteriorate into an instrument of political pressure. Indeed, it was the hopeful intent of the Charter that the Organization would be the supreme forum of world opinion and the shining symbol of peace and justice.
60.	The attempts which had been made to influence the solution of various problems, some of which related especially to the Middle East, and the pressure brought to bear in certain instances, were indeed detrimental to the United Nations and they must not be allowed to prevail or to frustrate its efforts towards peace and justice.
61.	All must unite in helping to avert that dangerous tendency by co-operating and wielding a collective influence for the cause of peace. By that means all would contribute to making the Organization a supreme body, qualified beyond any doubt to defend the interests of humanity. That should be the goal of the current and future sessions.
62.	In conclusion, Rahim Bey urged Members to strive for unanimity of purpose, in order to bring light to the world in place of the shadows that had descended upon it. All gathered there had gained experience through the trials of the past and were aware that theirs was no easy road. Yet it was in their hearts to accept the burdens which had been delegated to them, so that they might bring to humanity the just solutions which were so desperately needed. It was earnestly to be hoped that the fourth session of the General Assembly would mark a step forward on the road to stability and peace in the world.
