Mr. STOLK recalled that 24 October would mark the fourth anniversary of the date of deposit of the ratifications necessary for the entry into force of the United Nations Charter, an act which had preceded the first session of the General Assembly, held in London a few months later. At that time, the optimism to which the coming into being of the United Nations had given rise had been overshadowed by the difficulties of many problems. Many delegations had emphasized that the errors of the past should be avoided and had referred continually in the discussions to the reason for the failure of the League of Nations. Various representatives had referred to the role to be played by the great Powers and by the so-called medium or small States in the development of real international cooperation. Atomic energy had also been mentioned as one of the basic problems which gave rise to the dilemma of peace and war. In spite of doubt whether it would be possible to retain co-operative unity between the great Powers after the end of hostilities, it had been hoped that difficulties would be overcome by understanding and tolerance, and that sure progress would be made towards the accomplishment of the ideals of the Charter.
64.	Since that time the work of the United Nations had increased in an amazing way. Its principal organs and a great many subsidiary bodies had carried out continuous work and the Secretariat had gained great experience and had made its technical and practical contribution in an enthusiastic and praiseworthy manner. But all that work had taken place under the continual pressure of political events, of social upheavals and dangerous economic crises which had stultified international co-operation and had created a number of difficulties in finding the lowest common denominator for reconciling basic differences and bringing opposing tendencies together.
65.	Hardly a year previously the General Assembly had met in Paris in an undeniable atmosphere of fear. The discord among the great Powers, aggravated by the Berlin blockade, had caused international tension which had given rise to all kinds of scepticism in public opinion. But common sense and the firm desire to explore all possibilities of agreement "had prevailed in the United Nations, and especially in the General Assembly, which had unanimously adopted its resolution 190 (III), sponsored by Mexico, requesting the great Powers to renew their efforts to settle their differences and to establish permanent peace. At the same time, the Presidents of the Security Council and of the General Assembly, together with the Secretary-General and the Argentine, Belgian, Canadian, Chinese, Colombian and Syrian delegations, had exhausted all means in their power to find a solution to the Berlin blockade dispute which would be acceptable to all parties.
66.	The lifting of the blockade and the meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Paris had resulted from that co-ordinated action. But fundamental differences still existed between the great Powers, and the final post-war settlement and the signing of the peace treaties were still indispensable prerequisites for the functioning of the United Nations and the proper solution of the aforesaid political problems. Many of the Charter’s provisions could not be implemented until that prior condition had been met, and the real and effective co-operation of all Member States could not bear fruit until the difficult task of postwar settlement had been accomplished. The nations’ path to their final goal was fraught with difficulties which helped to maintain mutual distrust, and many nations, anxious to preserve their common interests and the basic principles of their civilization, had felt obliged to group themselves against any possible emergencies.
67.	But the possibilities of progress towards permanent peace appeared more promising than the previous year. In the introduction to his report, the Secretary-General had stated that he was frankly optimistic, and the President had supported him by expressing the hope that the current session would be known as that of the “Peace Assembly” (220th meeting). And the containing of the differences between the great Powers within peaceful limits, the lessening of the fear of a new war and the positive work carried out by the United Nations in recent months augured results more constructive than those of the past.
68.	Mr. Stolk referred to the mediation and conciliation negotiations initiated by Count Bernadotte, who had died in the accomplishment of his efforts for peace in Palestine, efforts which had culminated, under the Acting Mediator, in the armistice agreements between the parties concerned. That showed the undeniable value of peaceful procedure when used as an instrument of the United Nations for the settlement of disputes. In Indonesia, again as a result of the conciliation efforts of the United Nations, a beginning appeared to have been made along the path leading to final harmony between the indigenous inhabitants and Europeans. It was hoped that in Kashmir too the active progress of the Commission would finally assure a system likewise offering equitable guarantees for the settlement of the conflict.
69.	In economic and social matters a great effort had been displayed during the year covered by the Secretary-General's report. There had been close collaboration between the United Nations and its specialized agencies in improving conditions for the production and distribution of food, and attention had been given to questions of labour, health, nutrition, child welfare, narcotics control, education and refugees. Mr. Stolk referred to the granting of fellowships for specialized studies, to the organization of seminars and similar social welfare services, and emphasized the special interest devoted during the preceding year to the problems of economic development of under-developed countries, the promotion of full employment and economic stability, and the technical assistance necessary to attain such aims together with a general improvement in the standard of living of the peoples. The Venezuelan delegation had always been very interested in the question of economic development; the many aspects of the problems of development of underdeveloped countries would be studied on the basis of the co-operative programme of technical assistance for economic development through the United Nations and the specialized agencies, submitted by the Economic and Social Council. All that activity in the economic, social and cultural fields tended to neutralize the political tendencies which hindered a rebirth of international confidence.
70.	The United Nations Trusteeship System was being progressively strengthened and was promoting the interests of the Trust Territories, in order to enable the respective populations freely to determine their own destinies. The General Assembly had carefully considered the position of the so-called Non-Self-Governing Territories and had decided to establish a Special Committee on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter. Thus peaceful collaboration between the Administering Powers and other Member States in the interests of all those peoples would be possible, without any derogation from the sovereignty of the former.
71.	Mr. Stolk repeated that the principal causes which hindered the Organization’s action and the application of certain provisions of „ the Charter lay in the disagreement between the great Powers.
72.	The application of the unanimity rule had created new obstacles. Its effect had made itself felt recently in the question of the admission of new Members. On that point, the Venezuelan delegation confirmed the opinions it had previously expressed.
73.	The use of the veto to bar the admission of States to membership in the United Nations was unjustified when it was based on reasons other than those indicated in Article 4 of the Charter; it was in opposition to that express provision and disregarded the opinion given by the International Court of Justice. The fact that a State was peace-loving, accepted the obligations of the Charter, and was willing and able to carry them out, was sufficient reason to act on its application for admission; the delay on the fourteen applications which were pending was reducing the authority and prestige of the United Nations.
74.	The interpretation of the provisions of the Charter had given rise to contradictory decisions and violent statements, in particular whenever attempts had been made to determine the exact scope of the principle of non-intervention set forth in paragraph 7 of Article 2, safeguarding the sovereignty of States Members in matters which were essentially within their domestic jurisdiction. The question was often determined by political factors, with the consequent danger of contradictory interpretations. On several occasions the minority had categorically rejected the opinion of the majority, on the ground that it violated the provisions of that Article. That deepened division and prejudiced international cooperation in matters as important as human rights. Perhaps not a few States Members would be unwilling to subscribe, in due course, to the covenant on human rights and to the measures of implementation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which the General Assembly had proclaimed by its resolution 217 (III) of 10 December 1948, if they found that politics were going to be used as an instrument of pressure to interpret particular clauses in cases of alleged violations. The Venezuelan delegation considered that an effort should be made to define the scope of the principle of non-intervention, as set forth in the Charter, in the light of those provisions of the Charter which established the general principles of international co-operation in the economic, social, cultural and humanitarian fields. The International Court of Justice or the International Law Commission might perhaps render valuable service if they were to consider the matter and give an opinion on it. The Venezuelan delegation also thought that the Court was called upon to play a role of cardinal importance whenever disputes arose in the General Assembly regarding the existence of facts which, once proved, would constitute a violation of an international obligation.
75.	It had also been impossible to give effect to Article 43 of the Charter. Disagreement on the problem of armaments and the prohibition and control of atomic energy and other means of mass destruction subsisted more or less as before. It was argued that so long as security had not been achieved, there could be no disarmament, but at the same time the delay in reaching agreement on those problems caused a continuance of the fear which made armaments seem indispensable for the protection of peace and security against possible aggression. The same unfavourable circumstances prevented any agreement between East and West in working out means of guaranteeing that atomic energy would be used for peaceful purposes only. The Venezuelan delegation hoped that the obstacles to the solution of those problems would not result in a long postponement of the efforts necessary for their solution.
76.	 Mr. Stolk concluded by saying that the Venezuelan delegation wholeheartedly shared the hopes and aims of all those who wished the General Assembly’s deliberations the greatest success. He did not believe that the accusations of the past would fail to break out again during the discussions. Nevertheless, the Venezuelan delegation was confident that the favourable circumstances to which Mr. Stolk had referred earlier in his speech would finally justify; the bright hope expressed by the President of the Assembly that the current session would prove to be that of the “Peace Assembly”. Only through the activities of the United Nations, inspired by truth, justice and equity, could all countries reconcile their interests and find the way that led to agreement, friendship, and effective international co-operation.
