In view of the very lengthy agenda that has been presented to us, several items of which are undoubtedly of grave and pressing international importance calling for prompt and effective action on the part of the General Assembly at its present session, as well as of the fact that there is very little that my delegation can add to the wise thoughts and most constructive suggestions for the restoration of peace and future security, which have been brought out so vividly and eloquently in the illuminating and sterling speeches of those eminent and distinguished statesmen who have preceded me on this rostrum since the opening of our present session, my remarks must of necessity be somewhat brief.
59.	First, my delegation desires me to express to the President its sincerest congratulations on his election as President of the General Assembly of the United Nations, the greatest international, legislative and consultative body of the world, as well as the pledge of its support and co-operation in the discharge of the duties and responsibilities of his high office. The size of the vote cast in his behalf is an eloquent testimony on the part of his colleagues to his imminent fitness and great ability to preside over the deliberations of this august body.
60.	Secondly, to our recently retired President, His Excellency Brigadier General Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary for Foreign Affairs, permanent representative and chairman of the Philippine delegation, we also extend our congratulations on his completion of a most successful term of office. During his incumbency, he wonderfully endeared himself to all his colleagues by his geniality, dignified bearing, simplicity of manner, powerful intellectual capacity, great forensic eloquence coupled with his wide breadth of knowledge of parliamentary rules of procedure and diplomatic precedence. General Romulo certainly is a great national figure in his own country, but, in my humble opinion, he is also one of the outstanding statesmen of the world.
61.	Collective security for world peace is the foundation upon which the edifice called the United Nations has been built and must always rest. Upon this edifice has been indelibly inscribed the solemn pledge of each Member State of the United Nations to join with each other in the achievement and maintenance of collective security throughout the world. The scope of the operations of the United Nations in this respect is not confined to any particular geographical segments of the world or to any specific racial and religious identities thereof. It is world-wide, embracing all peoples, all nations and all climes.
62.	For the attainment of universal peace and security, there must be, first and last, universal freedom. One portion of the world cannot enjoy the great blessings of peace and freedom while other portions are being held in physical, political, economic, religious and intellectual bondage and restraint. Such restraint and bondage bring grave pain, unhappiness, poverty, unrest and turmoil to the peoples and nations who are thus affected, and so long as these conditions continue to obtain in any part of the world and are allowed to continue, there will not be any permanent peace. Peace and freedom are indivisible. Where freedom is not found, peace has no abode; and where there is absence of peace, misery, poverty, unhappiness, turmoil and strife reign supreme.
63.	Freedom is the natural and divine aspiration of every individual and of all peoples, irrespective of race, and for its achievement and realization no sacrifice is considered too great. The boy, no matter how loving and affectionate his parents are to him, nevertheless longingly and wistfully looks forward to his coming of age, his twenty-first anniversary, the day of his legal freedom. The girl also looks forward to the day when she goes away from her mother’s apron strings. So also do peoples long held under physical, political, economic, religious and social restraint and bondage look forward to the day of their liberation and freedom. There are many nations here represented in this General Assembly who not only bear testimony to this fact, but who also had to undergo long years of bitter struggle and oppression to obtain their freedom and liberty. The cries for liberty and freedom now going up from subjugated nations and oppressed peoples in certain parts of the world should not escape the ears of the United Nations or be permitted to pass unheeded. So long as these cries for liberty and freedom, with their woeful tales, continue to go unheeded and unassuaged, there will never be world peace.
64.	One world of free peoples living under their own vines and fig trees, basking in the eternal sunlight of liberty and freedom under law was the glorious vision of those founding nations which met in San Francisco some five or more years ago and there drew up and attached their respective signatures to that great and memorable document known as the Charter of the United Nations, which will serve as a guide for the government of all free peoples and nations of the world. This was not an idealistic action, but an extremely realistic action growing out of centuries of painful experience on the part of humanity.
65.	In bringing about the realization of this great vision, Africa and the Africans must be brought into the picture. The continent of Africa stands at the cross-roads of Europe and Asia. It gave asylum to the blessed Christ when His earthly parents were fleeing from the rule of Rome. One of its sons voluntarily relieved Him for a time of the Cross when He was struggling up Mount Calvary under the lashes of Roman soldiers for His crucifixion.
66.	The sons and daughters of Africa have been forcibly torn from her and carried to Europe, America and other parts of the world and disgracefully used for the building of their financial and social economy. Africa’s great mineral and other economic resources have been ruthlessly exploited by Europe to the woeful disadvantage of Africa’s sons and daughters. African leaders, without any legal or justifiable cause whatsoever, have been forcibly dispossessed of their territories and subjected to the harshest political rule and tyranny and kept in a state of subservience, ignorance and economic dependence verging on poverty.
67.	These conditions exist in various degrees in the various European colonies in Africa. I am happy to say, however, that at present these conditions do not exist in the United Kingdom and French colonial possessions in Africa, except, perhaps in a limited and more modified form. Both the United Kingdom and French Governments seem now to be fully awakened to their sense of international responsibility for the well-being, prosperity and happiness of the inhabitants of those territories over which they rule, and they are now giving the most serious attention and consideration to the demands of their colonial subjects for more self-government and eventual complete independence. These are pleasing and hopeful signs towards peace.
68.	It serves no wise purpose to place upon the cries of subjugated peoples for liberty, freedom and independence the labels of “communism” and “sedition”. Let us face the facts and realize that it is not within the power of any nation or group of nations to push back time. We may turn the hands of the clock; nevertheless, time moves on just the same and cannot be stopped.
69.	We are living in a new age, call it the atomic or any other name. We find new conditions confronting us. In the entire continent of Africa, containing over 150 million inhabitants, there exist only four independent sovereign states: Egypt and Ethiopia in the north-east; Liberia in the west, the Union of South Africa in the south. Looking at it objectively, is this not alarming?
70.	The plea which has been put forward against the claims and demands for independence on the part of the inhabitants of certain parts of Africa has always been that those people are not yet fully developed, are not advanced and are not capable of governing themselves. If this is true, then what a sad and painful commentary on those governing Powers who have had the peoples of those territories under absolute and complete control for centuries past.
71.	Be this as it may, the time has now arrived when the target dates must be fixed by the United Nations for the granting of self-government and independence to those peoples of Africa and elsewhere who are, in its opinion, prepared and capable of governing themselves. Governments of Europe having colonial possessions in Africa, should have no serious objections to such a procedure. They should bear in mind the fable of the lion and the rat.
72.	My country, Liberia, an African sovereign State on the West coast of Africa, cannot be unconcerned and disinterested in the fortunes and conditions of all the inhabitants and peoples of Africa, more especially those of West Africa. We are, therefore, naturally in sympathy with the aspirations for freedom and the demands for political independence of those peoples of Africa who may now, and in the not too distant future, be prepared, by the general standard set up by the civilized world, to govern themselves in an orderly and peaceful manner. They have our deepest sympathy.
73.	Africa is indeed the coming continent of the world — and that in the not distant future. Its potential power in human and material resources is great and incalculable. Its soil, in most parts, is rich and virgin. Large quantities of the world’s most valuable mineral still lie buried beneath its soil. Immense tracts of forest lands are yielding the highest grade of the most valuable woods for building and other purposes, despite centuries of ruthless exploitation. The large number of African youths, from various points in Africa, who go over to Europe and America for advanced culture and scientific studies and research, is rapidly increasing every year. For what reasons and to what purpose? The answer should be clear and apparent.
74.	If the legitimate aspirations and yearnings of the peoples of Africa for self-rule and independence do not receive that sympathetic understanding which they deserve from the colonial Powers, then the continent of Africa will become a reeking bed of unrest and strife in the near future and a serious threat to world peace. This threat can be easily removed by the display of wise, far-sighted statesmanship on the part of the United Nations, and not by the subtle intrigues of international politics. My delegation feels that it is its duty to strike this note of warning and advice to all the nations assembled here, who are charged with the collective security of the peace of the world.
75.	The actions taken by the Security Council vis a vis Korea, on 25 June last, have the unqualified endorsement and full support of the Government and people of Liberia. Such prompt and effective action on the part of the Security Council went far towards reviving the fading and dying confidence of the peace-loving peoples of the world in the effectiveness of the United Nations and of its further ability to re-establish and maintain world peace.
76.	In spite of the propaganda which has been launched against the actions taken in Korea, it must be admitted, after a careful study of all the facts and circumstances in the case, that there was no other alternative left to the United Nations but forceful intervention in order to compel compliance with its commands issued to the Government of North Korea for the immediate withdrawal of all its military and armed forces to the 38th parallel. The die having now been cast, the situation admits of no compromise or appeasement. Military actions must be pressed to the final end, firmly establishing the authority of the United Nations in all of North Korea between the 38th parallel and the boundaries of North Korea and Manchuria. North Korean leaders should be held strictly responsible and accountable for all warlike acts and brutal atrocities committed by its armies upon the military forces of the United Nations and the military forces of the Government of South Korea and its civilian populations.
77.	Until a satisfactory agreement can be reached between the United Nations and the Government of North Korea with respect to a united Korea, the United Nations should, in our opinion, continue its military occupation of North Korea and assume the political and civil administration thereof.
78.	Mr. Bevin, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom, in his great speech delivered before the General Assembly on 25 September [283rd meeting], wisely and very clearly pointed out in the following words what would have to be our postwar policy in Korea: “We shall have before us, at this fifth session of the General Assembly, a number of grave issues which have arisen as a result of developments in the Far East. “The conflict still rages in Korea, but I am confident that the authority of the United Nations will prevail However, that is really only the beginning. It is also our duty to look beyond the conflict and to find means whereby peace and unity can be restored in Korea. “In our view there must no longer be South Koreans and North Koreans, but just Koreans, who must be encouraged to work together to rebuild their country with the advice and the help and the support of the United Nations. It is difficult in war to see the picture in its proper perspective, but in this General Assembly we have a great opportunity to consult with one another and plan for the days that lie ahead. “There has been, as I have already said, an overwhelming response to the call to resist aggression in Korea and to defeat the intentions of those who sought to use force to achieve their ends, but another test will be applied to our judgment in the settlement of Korea. Public opinion will judge us not only by the right use of our military power but also by the sincerity and good intentions of every Member of the United Nations in the final settlement of the problem and by the effectiveness of our actions for the rehabilitation of the country when hostilities have ceased.”
79.	What wise and constructive words!
80.	The United States plan [A/1377], as put forth by the United States Secretary of State, for the enlargement of the "powers and functions of the General Assembly in order to meet and overcome the obstructions of the veto in the Security Council on matters of grave and important international interests that may require prompt and effective actions to be taken for the security of world peace, also has the endorsement and full support of my Government. Undoubtedly, the United Nations should not merely be an instrument for peace, but rather a prompt and effective instrument. Promptness and effectiveness should characterize all of its actions. The further suggestion of the United States Secretary of State, to the effect that each Member State should be required to furnish and place at the disposal of the United Nations a certain number of soldiers, also has the support of my Government.
81.	In Conclusion, may I venture a remark and a suggestion? Taking into consideration the seriousness of our responsibilities, individually and collectively, we should be very careful about the decisions to be taken at this session of the General Assembly. We should not approach the various questions in a hostile and warlike manner. The General Assembly, as the United Nations, is intended not as an instrument of war, but as an instrument of peace. All and each of us come within these sacred portals with one objective, the restoration of peace to a troubled world.
82.	Peace must be arrived at through peaceful understandings, deliberate and calm considerations. We should eliminate suspicion from our councils. We should hear the views of the other side. Suggestions of all types, regardless of the source, should claim the careful and calm consideration of this General Assembly; they should not be viewed in an atmosphere of suspicion. Successful negotiations cannot be accomplished that way. Every nation should do its utmost to prevent a great world catastrophe. Some of us have witnessed two great world wars. We all know their consequences and effects, which have been most far-reaching and disastrous. We are not only responsible to our respective Governments; we are not only responsible to the present generation; we are responsible to posterity for the way in which we use this great trust and responsibility which has been placed upon us.
83.	Let us all, with one objective, retire to our respective places and appeal to the great Ruler of nations, without whom we can accomplish nothing. Without the aid and assistance of the great Arbiter of human events, all our efforts toward security and the maintenance of peace in the world will be in vain.
