
117.     Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you on your unanimous election to the office of President and by wishing you every success In your conduct of the debates at this important session of the General Assembly.

118.    Argentina Is attending the present session of the United Nations General Assembly at a very crucial juncture in its history. A nation which Is unswervingly dedicated to peace and liberty has decided to become the master of Its own destiny. This means the modernization of its institutions and a firm determination to avail itself of the most up-to-date facilities in order to achieve a high level of technological development and the greatest possible economic efficiency, It also requires a profound social sense which will enable all Argentinians to share In the material well-being and in the benefits of knowledge and culture. This genuinely revolutionary process epitomizes the will of a people which is prepared to change the present in order to build a more prosperous and befitting future.

119.    For many long years we beheld our homeland threatened with prostration as the legitimate hopes of many of its children were being frustrated. Meanwhile, around us, by contrast other nations were successfully healing their wounds, forging ahead or vigorously attaining their independence. The sole reason for the Argentine revolution — and its sole purpose — is to raise our country to a level of development commensurate with its responsibilities and with the opportunities that the contemporary world has to offer, to reaffirm the principle of authority, to restore order, to establish an efficient, modern and dynamic administration and, above all, to ensure that all the Inhabitants of its territory enjoy the benefits of freedom and security,

120.    The Government which sent me here is well aware that public Institutions must be the genuine product of the society which they are intended to govern. The more truly rooted they are in the nation's life, the more lasting they will be and the more capable of upholding and consolidating civil liberty.

121.    My country, as an integral part of the western world, Is determined to defend the values of a civilization based on respect for man as a being whose liberty is inalienable. The defence of this principle will always unite us with those countries which, within their own frontiers and In the world at large, are striving to create conditions which will ensure that liberty and respect for the human person, regardless of race or creed, do not remain empty words but become an every-day reality.

122.    The different human communities must be Independent if our civilization Is to be sound. This independence finds expression, at the Individual level, in man's freedom, and also in the free play of intermediate communities and of families within the State, and, at the international level, in national self-determination. That is why Argentina reaffirms once again its freedom to determine its own foreign policy as a sovereign and autonomous nation. It also believes that the world Organization must recognize the existence of intermediate groupings of States, such as the regional associations in which the nations directly concerned may try to find solutions to regional problems as countries sharing common features and linked by special historical and cultural bonds of long standing. Any action in this regard, however, clearly must be carried out under the United Nations Charter.

123.    These principles of liberty and international solidarity faithfully reflect the concerns and beliefs of our people. They are clearly proclaimed and recognized in the United Nations Charter. The Argentine Government reaffirms its allegiance to them and is convinced that If they are properly applied they can serve as a basis for closer international cooperation and the maintenance of a sure and lasting peace.

124.    International peace and security are the prime objectives of the United Nations, but peace will not come from weakness or cowardice but from strength and courage in defending the principles which make it possible.

125.    I now wish to refer to some of the questions on which the interest and attention of this session of the General Assembly are focused.

126.    But before doing so, I wish, on behalf of my country, to welcome a new State which has recently become a Member of the United Nations: Guyana. This is a particular pleasure for me since Argentina had the honour to co-sponsor, in the Security Council, the resolution recommending the entry of this American country.

127.    This session will have to deal with the serious problem created by the fact that the end of the Secretary-General's term of office is drawing nigh. U Thant recently made public Ms views on this matter, especially In his statement of 1 September. My Government sincerely hopes that our Secretary-General, who has given ample proof of his skill in guiding this complex international Organization, will remain in his post. He deserves the unconditional endorsement of all Member States. We trust that such manifest and express support will have a favourable effect on his final decision.

128.    Argentina is awestruck by the course that the armed conflict in South-East Asia is taking. This tragic conflagration, kindled by ambitions which are opposed to the emergence of a society based on respect for human dignity and freedom, constitutes a dangerous threat to International, peace. It is therefore a particular pleasure for my country to welcome the urgent appeal made by His Holiness Pope Paul VI in a recent Encyclical which brings him Into our midst here once again. The Encyclical Christi Matri Rosary has clearly shown how very pressing Is the moral obligation incumbent upon Governments to maintain the peace and security of the human family.

129.    In this Assembly we have already heard voices raised in response to this appeal from Rome, Because of the role played by his country in the conflict, we attribute particular importance to the statement made by the representative of the United States, Ambassador Goldberg, putting forward very specific proposals in the search for peace. Countries which, like mine, anxiously hope for the solution of this problem, consider these proposals to be a definite step forward.

130.    We hope that in the course of the present debate we will hear many other constructive opinions and proposals, especially from those Governments which bear prime responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and from the countries of the region for which the peaceful settlement of the present dispute is a matter of life and death. The Argentine Government, for its part, accepts this responsibility and is prepared to contribute to this great endeavour which is one of the most urgent confronting mankind at the present time.

131.    The international situation, which the Secretary-General describes so accurately and dramatically in the introduction to his annual report [A/6301/Add.1], prompts us to reaffirm our conviction that it is the duty of the United Nations to make a very definite contribution towards the maintenance of international peace and security.

132.    To attain this aim, we need a strong Organization, supported by all Member States, efficient in its work and respectful of the San Francisco Charter, which, in spite of the passage of time, is as much in force today as it was in 1945.

133.    Many international problems have changed since then, but there is one which has been with us for two decades and which I cannot fail to mention: the existence of a divided Germany, We support the right of the Federal Republic of Germany to represent the entire German people as an indivisible nation,

134.    There is one subject to which my country attributes cardinal and decisive importance: the Malvinas Islands, And this is the proper time to express our gratitude for the massive support given in the United Nations to the Argentine position on this matter.

135.    The report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was adopted by General Assembly resolution 2105 (XX) without a dissenting vote. The same thing happened at the twentieth plenary session of the General Assembly with the adoption of resolution 2065 (XX) which, on the basis of resolution 1514 (XV), reaffirms the aim of "bringing to an end everywhere colonialism in all Its forms, one of which covers the case of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)".

136.    The General Assembly, noting the existence of a dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom concerning sovereignty over the said islands, Invited the Government of both countries to proceed with negotiations with a view to finding a peaceful solution to the problem.

137.    The visit paid by the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom, Mr. Michael Stewart, to my country this year provided an opportunity for the formal opening of talks. On that occasion it was agreed to proceed immediately with the negotiations, using either the diplomatic channel or any other methods to be agreed upon in order to fulfil this important purpose.

138.    During the month of July the negotiations continued through the diplomatic channel, and during these negotiations my Government submitted to the United Kingdom a note claiming that this territory should be returned and placing on record our earnest desire to guarantee and protect the interests of the inhabitants of the Islands by affording them particularly favourable conditions for their future.

139.    The notes submitted by Argentina [A/6261 and Add.l] and the United Kingdom [A/6262 and Add.1] to the Secretary-General describe these talks and indicate that it is intended to continue them in October of this year,

140.    My country is confident that this dispute will be definitively settled in the shortest possible time and that we can soon inform the General Assembly that the peaceful and permanent solution called for in resolution 2065 (XX) has been reached. The question of the Malvinas Islands is of a substantive nature for Argentina because it involves its sovereignty over part of its territory, and this explains certain individual attitudes which have repercussions in the media of information. But despite this Argentina, faithful to Its historic tradition, is endeavouring to solve the problem by peaceful means and through negotiations.

141.    The Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples continues to be progressively implemented and the results already achieved, or to be achieved in the immediate future, constitute one of the most constructive accomplishments of the United Nations. The work in this field is of a continuing nature; sometimes it consists of assisting new countries to attain independence, at other times of setting forth the problems on the road to independence, and at still other times of promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes or claims over territories under colonial rule, In this regard, we would like to recall resolution 2070 (XX) on Gibraltar because of the close bonds that unite my country with Spain, whose causes are our causes and whose legitimate rights we therefore support.

142.    Argentina reaffirms its support of the process of decolonization on which the United Nations has embarked and is ready to offer its contribution for its complete success. We wish, however, to point out our hope that careful attention will be given to certain elementary conditions for the effective existence of these new nations.

143.    World organizations are devoting increasing attention to economic matters. All aspects of international economic co-operation are particularly important to Argentina. And this is so for two main reasons. The first is that our country is situated in the temperate zone of the southern hemisphere and its great capacity to produce the items peculiar to that climate make it particularly vulnerable to anything which disturbs the smooth operation of the buying and selling markets. The second is the fact that we are in the midst of an industrialization process which we must continue, consolidate and raise to a high level of efficiency so that we can integrate our economy and participate more fully in international trade in manufactured goods.

144.    It must be borne in mind that every process of international collaboration and co-operation in this field — and, moreover, every attempt at economic integration among States — should be undertaken in such a way as not to interfere with the attainment of each nation's own goals, which are inalienable.

145.    There are four aspects which demand special attention: reform of the international monetary system, financial assistance to the developing countries, international trade, and food aid.

146.    Argentina is in favour of an immediate increase in the number of experts who are now engaged in discussing the reform of the international monetary system. It is urgently necessary to ensure that countries in the same position as Argentina participate in meetings of concern to them as members of the monetary system now in force. We are gratified to note that this view is shared by the International Monetary Fund and, very recently, by some developed countries.

147.    We also deem it essential, as regards financial assistance to the developing countries, to accelerate and increase the flow of long-term public and private investment capital. It is noteworthy that the coefficients of investment have remained at a standstill, as compared with those of previous years, and that they have declined in relation to the levels of the period 1955-1961.

148.    The third subject — international trade — is certainly of major importance if genuine and fruitful international economic co-operation is to become a reality.

149.    In spite of the effort involved in the creation of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, we cannot fail to note and recognize that the objectives originally set up for the Conference have not been fulfilled.

150.    It will be for this session of the General Assembly to determine the date and place of the second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. This will be a further attempt to find solutions, a new opportunity to put to test the political will of States to take practical and constructive steps.

151.    In undertaking this new responsibility, it is essential to make sure that the preparations and programme for the Conference are focused on a limited number of questions so that the practical solutions which we earnestly desire may be forthcoming.

152.    The result of the second Conference will depend on the effort devoted to this preparatory work. If this work is not done properly, the Argentine Government doubts whether the conclusions that may be
reached will be of any value and, indeed, whether there will be any point in convening the Conference.

153.    Again with respect to this question of trade relations at the international level, brief reference should be made to other equally important aspects of the problem.

154.    The series of trade negotiations conducted under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade — GATT — the so-called "Kennedy Round" — has entered its last lap. Argentina in playing an active part in this meeting, believes it to be highly important and hopes to become a full member of GATT.

155.    We note with alarm the strong protectionist trend which is becoming more marked in the industrialized countries, especially as regards the agricultural sector. This — and let it be clearly understood — does not imply that we are questioning the right of every country to look after its own interests. What we advocate is that an effort should be directed towards combining these interests with those of other countries.

156.    We will spare no effort to initiate a fruitful phase of negotiations with the industrialized countries in general, and with the European Economic Community in particular, so that all interests at stake can be taken into account and suitable co-ordination achieved.

157.    This analysis of the main aspects of international economic co-operation would not be complete if I omitted to mention the fact, in connexion with the World Food Programme, that it was Argentina which proposed, at the appropriate time, the establishment of a World Food Fund. This initiative of ours led to recommendation A.II.6 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and subsequently to General Assembly resolution 2096 (XX). The latter provides for the preparation of a report on multilateral food aid which, as the Secretary-General pointed out at the forty-first session of the Economic and Social Council, is certainly one of the most expedient and challenging mandates ever assigned to him by the Organization, The problem of hunger in the world distresses Argentina as it distresses other countries and, being aware of our responsibility, we intend to do our utmost to find a solution.

158.    We trust that these subjects will lead to studies and decisions that are free from the prejudices which have hitherto seriously impeded multilateral action and that, when the time comes to take specific action, the international community can count on the firm resolve of its members to find constructive solutions to the increasingly pressing problems of hunger in the world. The Argentine Republic looks forward to the time when it can gear its enormous food production capacity to meet the needs of the hungry areas under a system which guarantees adequate incentives.

159.    Argentina has a legal tradition of long standing which dates back to the early years of its independence. The fight for the organization of our nation may be construed as the search for a juridical structure consonant with our country's needs

160.    This faith in the law has spread beyond our frontiers into the world at large. Argentine jurists like Amancio Aloorta, Luis Marfa Drago and Carlos Calvo, have, through their knowledge and intelligence, helped to establish the rule of law in our continent and have formulated doctrines and principles which have guided the international relations of our peoples,

161.    Argentina strongly supports the United Kingdom initiative on the peaceful settlement of disputes on the basis of the fundamental principles of international law.

162.    Argentina has every confidence and will lend its support to any effort to maintain peace through law. We have faith in the triumph of intelligence because we have faith in man. All our efforts to progress technologically and to harness nature rationally will be meaningless if we forget man, with all his limitations but with all the spiritual wealth he naturally enjoys as an ontologically free being, as the all-important being, capable of overcoming the circumstances of his environment and of thus determining his own destiny.

163.    We open our doors to all the triumphs of technology, because we know that the harnessing of nature, the continuing process of "humanizing" it, is a sine qua non of modern Living. But we also try not to be the victims of a depersonalized technology, in which the means become the end. And just as, in the case of man, no radical distinction can be made between the purely material and the purely spiritual because each human being has both his intelligence and his senses, we are also convinced that no lasting form of culture can exist unless the use It makes of material things has a spiritual basis.

164.    We Argentinians believe that we have shown ourselves to be a nation with a deep sense of spiritual values, a nation whose conduct therefore has always been characterized by friendly co-operation, the desire for peaceful and harmonious relations with all peoples of the globe. We wish faithfully to fulfil our nation's need to promote the well-being and greatness of the human family and to make available to it the benefits of our peace, of our technical and scientific progress, and of a culture which has enriched mankind.

165.    It could be said that the Argentina of today, to quote the words of Tacitus, is "res olim dissociabiles miscuit principatum ad libertatem".