145.     On behalf of my Government, headed by His Excellency Colonel Jean Bedel Bokassa, I have the honour of discharging a twofold mission from this rostrum; to bring to the valiant peoples of the Member States and friends, on the one hand, a message of brotherly greeting from the people of the Central African Republic and, on the other hand, my country's sincere wishes for the full well-being and prosperity of all mankind at a time when sombre clouds are darkening the international horizon.

146.    Also on behalf of my Government and my delegation, I take particular pleasure in again conveying to you, Mr. President, our great satisfaction at your unanimous election to the Presidency of this session and in once again conveying to you our warmest congratulations. In electing you to the high post of President of the General Assembly the Members of our Organization have not only recognized your incontestable qualities as a diplomat devoted to the cause of the United Nations, but have also paid a well- deserved tribute to your beautiful country of Afghanistan, with its age-old mythology and living poetry.

147.    The delegation of the Central African Republic is firmly convinced that your rich experience in the problems of the hour and the proverbial wisdom with which you habitually approach these problems will bring our work to a happy conclusion.

148.    Lastly, it is with genuine pleasure that my delegation wishes to associate itself with the heartfelt tribute which marked the departure of your predecessor, Mr. Fanfani, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy. It was thanks to his statesmanlike qualities that we were able without difficulty to get over circumstances which we were justified in regarding as the sequellae of the historic nineteenth session of the General Assembly.

149.    During his triumphant foreign tour last July Colonel Bokassa, President of the Central African Republic, addressing the Press, said the following:

"On 1 January 1966 we had at the head of the country a corrupt and dispirited administration and a regime which was no longer more than a caricature of democracy. The State was represented only by a disillusioned President, Moreover, the establishment of an embassy of the People's Republic of China was a factor of subversion which had made it possible for certain leaders to form cells and for a people's army to be created. It was in those circumstances that the army took power.

"What was its aim? To restore order through justice; to restore the people's faith in a better future through work and discipline; and to set an example of a whole people mobilized for the struggle against poverty, on the model of an army fighting to defend the fatherland."

150.    The revolution in the Central African Republic, as you know, was born of a crisis of regime; therefore our programme, instead of confining itself to governmental and administrative action, has the primary purpose of establishing a sound regime. For, since we are entrusted with a mandate which will be fulfilled only when we have reconstructed a new republic in our country, we shall do everything possible to promote, when the time comes, a genuinely democratic regime in the Central African Republic. That is why, for the time being, we consider that the Government, the army and the people must be closely united and, free from all political passion, must devote themselves primarily to the urgent task of economic and social recovery.

151.    We in the Central African Republic are just as well aware of the importance and complexity as of the usefulness of the work to be done. We know that poverty has always engendered acts of violence and exploitation, whereas the quest for well-being, even relative well-being, on the contrary, is eminently favourable to the emergence of true democracy and a constantly improving way of life.

152.    To us, therefore, year 1 of the Central African revolution appears as a year of work, work which elevates him who does it and ennobles the country for which it is done; above all, work in the fields, however hard and unrewarding, especially in our tropical regions. My Government attaches particular importance to this because we are among the most unfortunate countries on account of our distance from the coast. Our products are subject to fluctuating prices, while imported goods and equipment are becoming increasingly dear.

153.    The joy of living and working without fear of official exactions —that is what the revolution in the Central African Republic has brought to each of our peasants. My Government indeed desired that the whole people of the Republic should be mobilized as any army fighting for the country's prosperity. For it is a real fight, and the example has been set by Bokassa and his ministers, who go out dressed as for battle to the fields, choosing virgin land and there putting to work all the mechanical facilities at the disposal of the Central African Republic to clear hundreds and hundreds of hectares which are then handed over to the Central African peasants. In addition, by means of radio and the Press, the Government, in the person of Colonel Bokassa, explains the crop time-table, showing the promising prospects for the harvest. It is not presumptuous to contemplate the future with a good deal of optimism with regard to cotton, our country's main crop.

154.    I would add that my Government is concerned also with assuring well-being to the people of the forest belt and is doing everything to see that the plantations established there — of coffee for example — are expanded.

155.    As a signatory of the International Coffee Agreement concluded in 1964 in order to avoid a collapse of prices, my country has not shirked its obligation of solidarity, so necessary in the market. We have had imposed on us an annual quota of 9,000 tons; this year the quota will be far exceeded, because we are expecting a harvest of 12,000 to 15,000 tons, and in the years to come we hope to reach our production target of 25,000 tons. We hope that in the debates which will take place on the revision and renewal of the International Coffee Agreement, our partners will be keenly aware of the sacrifices which have been and are being made by the Central African Republic in the interests of all coffee producers.

156.    My country envisages, in the years to come, a further extension of the numerous and rich resources of our subsoil. The Central African Republic is in fact a producer of diamonds; but our subsoil contains also uranium deposits of international standard, a deposit of 69 per cent iron ore and deposits of copper, tin, gold and rock salt.

157.    The first results of studies undertaken in this field are encouraging. After the searches for uranium ore are completed we shall consider the possibility of setting up a processing plant requiring considerable investment.

158.    Further, the Central African Republic is engaged particularly in operations for developments in two fields.

159.    I refer, first, to the Central African forest belt, which, according to recent calculations of the Tropical Forest Technical Centre, has just been revealed as one of the richest in the world. Great development possibilities due to the nature of the terrain and the high concentration of rare species, are under study.

160.    Secondly, in the field of tourism, two large areas have been set aside in the north-east of the country and rented to European companies. From December onwards we shall be able to welcome tourists at reasonable prices. I am convinced that these visits to a country hitherto unknown to world tourism will strengthen the friendship existing between the Central African people and its friends.

161.    In May 1967, Bangui, the capital of the Republic, will have an international airport which will place it, for example, within six hours flying time from Paris. The United Nations Development Programme is studying plans for a railway to run across the equatorial forest, linking the banks of the Ubangi to the port of Douala on the Atlantic.

162.    We have also formed a mixed-economy company for the operation of our internal airline, which has so far played no part in the development of the country, although in the equatorial regions aviation is the surest and most rapid means of communication and can be used to transport expensive or perishable products.

163.    We hope to accomplish this economic work in its entirety and in all its aspects, with the help of all our friends.

164.    These are certain aspects of my country's economic situation which are worthy of mention here.

165.    I would add that our market is wide open to goods and equipment, but we want it to be understood that our country is not simply a profitable outlet: it is a vast production area, in which fruitful co-operation and a friendly atmosphere must be established.

166.    We intend, among other things, completely to restore our entire road and external transport system, on which the success of the economic operations now in progress largely depends.

167. My Government is also pleased with the efforts that have been made in the field of education in all its forms. The fight against ignorance is one of our principal concerns, for ignorance means mistakes, lack of comprehension, prejudice, obsessions — in a word, everything that is detrimental to enlightened and effective co-operation.

168.    Not the least of my Government’s efforts are directed towards improving existing conditions in the field of health.

169.    In short the domestic policy of the Central African Republic aims at order, which is the surety for peace and security, in work, through which man is ennobled and, above all, indignity, without which man's life loses its point.

170.    Our major and constant concern within the framework of this great domestic undertaking, which — why should w-e not say it? — has not failed to impress our foreign visitors, finds expression above all in the unshakable will of our Head of State to ensure peace and security for the Central African people, which, to some small extent, is contributing to the stability of international peace and security.

171.    Colonel Jean Bedel Bokassa, who is a former French officer, convinced that "force without justice is tyrannical and justice without force is powerless", has, from the very first hour of taking power, built his profession of faith on the exercise of justice enlightened by truth.

172.    Our foreign policy, of principal concern to my Government, is that every day we should resolutely expand our horizons beyond our frontiers, consolidate former friendships and create new ones in which our national sovereignty will be respected. Our foreign policy, in a word, is based on objective candour, constructive moderation and dignity.

173.    On the specifically African level, both regional and inter-African, we have proclaimed our sincere will to be guided by a constant concern for good neighbourliness, shunning all temptation to intervene in the affairs of our partners, whether they belong to the Central African Economic and Customs Union (UDEAC) and the Common Afro-Malagasy Organization (OCAM), or to the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

174.    My Government is a firm supporter of African unity, has proclaimed its will to work actively in that cause and wishes to do all in its power to make a positive contribution thereto.

175.    First, at the level of Equatorial Africa as a whole, my country is an active supporter of the Central African Economic and Customs Union, which we see as a progressive and realistic starting point for
African economic unity in the long term, even though it is the only genuine economic union in Africa IOA the time being.

176.    Next, at the inter-African level, at a time when the African continent is trying to find its way, the Common Afro-Malagasy Organization represents, in our view, a signpost, in that linguistic and cultural affinities bind all its member States and can, to some extent, help to overcome and control certain ideological passions, or even, through the genuine cohesion of its member States, protect them from all foreign subversive influences.

177.    Lastly, the Organization of African Unity, which in reality constitutes the final stage of the ideal which is dear to us, remains for us the paramount aim and we shall not cease to encourage its progress.

178.    On the world scale, the Central African Republic reaffirms its will to choose its friends freely, with scrupulous respect for the principle of non-intervention, and it is anxious to maintain friendly relations with all peace-loving and justice-loving States. In this connexion, we need to co-operate with States which help the third world. One of these, clearly, is France, which, for readily intelligible reasons, has a special place with us. For we believe that a common outlook implies common work and a pooling of the fruits of this work. It is with this particular thought in mind that we are proud of our fraternal relations with France. There is no question here of a relationship between colonizers and the colonized.

179.    The Central African Republic, under the wise leadership of the new governmental team presided over by Colonel Jean Bedel Bokassa, has reaffirmed its attachment to the principles contained in the United Nations Charter, which it intends to respect in the spirit and letter, as a full Member. We in the Central African Republic believe that the Organization must surpass itself in its efforts to attain the fundamental objectives which its founders laid down. I mean, first, peace among nations and the peoples composing them; secondly, equality among me”, whoever they are, among peoples and, hence, among their respective nations; thirdly, Christian brotherhood, becoming more developed and warmer each day and based upon truth, which, according to a philosopher, means sharing the sufferings of others, bearing another's cross for a moment upon our own shoulders, wiping away a tear, bringing a smile to another's face; fourthly, greater and more positive world solidarity in all fields, in order that humanity may gradually cease to consist of rich and poor countries.

180.    In the daily life of mankind nothing, or practically nothing, leads us to think that peace among nations, equality among men, Christian brotherhood and world solidarity are living realities. Man not only continues to exploit his fellow man, but to enslave him as well; worse still — and this is the tragedy — man stubbornly continues, without scruple, to arm himself against his fellow man. It is no secret to anyone that the twenty-first session of the General Assembly is taking place in an international climate which is hardly reassuring.

181.    We cannot hide the spectre of perpetual insecurity that haunts all mankind; the end of the world seems to be at hand. Peace, so very dear to all peoples and all men, seems unstable. Man refuses to disarm; and this leads me to the vital problem of general and complete disarmament.

182.    Not satisfied with the disastrous effects of conventional weapons, another weapon has been put into man's hands, under the pretext of developing science and technology: I refer to the atomic weapon, the surest way of destroying the world. The headlong- nuclear arms race, the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the pollution of the atmosphere are far from being ended. The Moscow Treaty has not been followed by a further treaty finally putting an end to all nuclear and thermonuclear tests. Behind the reasons of principle invoked to excuse such misdeeds we see mutual distrust, selfishness aggravated because certain advances have been made and, finally, the inexplicable fear of losing prestige in this field. In the opinion of my delegation, it is urgently necessary to stop the dissemination of atomic weapons, to stop nuclear and thermonuclear tests. Moreover, my delegation considers it necessary to denuclearize Africa and proceed without hesitation to general and complete disarmament, with all the control guarantees that such an operation requires. We believe that it is imperative to hold a world conference for this purpose, attended by all the nuclear Powers without exception.

183.    The role of the United Nations in this matter must be seen as particularly important. All means must be used to see that the Powers concerned realize the heavy responsibility they are incurring before humanity which, moreover, they are deliberately condemning to famine and poverty. Unimaginable sums are being squandered on a headlong arms race, on pleasure trips to the Moon, when they should be used here on our planet to ensure the well-being of two thirds of the world’s population. In this connexion Colonel Jean Bedel Bokassa has said:

"We do not ask for trips to the Moon; we only want our rightful place here on Earth. The great Powers must turn their attention to the problem of Africa's under-development, for it was God’s will that all men should be equal and should benefit equally from the good things of the Earth. The great Powers are spending a great deal of money on war, when Africa, a land of peace, needs it so much."

184.    It seems to me that we are living in a strange world. Every year the third world gets a little poorer in comparison with the industrialized northern hemisphere and every year, in compensation, the group oi industrial Powers attempts to increase the amounts which the various aid mechanisms make available to the under-privileged countries.

185.    We cannot refrain from saying that each year we witness scandalous manifestations of the exploitation of man by man. In this respect we have never ceased to denounce the scandal of the widening gap between the prices of primary commodities and those of manufactured goods and we consider that this is one of the essential causes of the persistence of under-development.

186.    I should not like what I have just said to give the impression that my country lacks interest in the assistance it receives, or gratitude to those who give that aid, whether it be bilateral or multilateral. Far from it. This assistance is indispensable while we are awaiting the far-reaching reforms in the trading system for which we are asking.

187.    In any case, we firmly hope that in the world as a whole a just solution will bring relief. That is why the Central African Republic, in this connexion, supports and will continue to support, at all meetings at which it may be present, the generous plan proposed to the world by France in 1964 at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,

188.    Like all new countries with an agricultural economy, like Central African Republic is attempting, as I said a few minute ago, to industrialize, in order to increase the income of its nationals by providing them with remunerative employment and in order to achieve a stable balance of trade. My country asks only to be helped in this effort and to this end we in the Central African Republic shall welcome all gestures of goodwill.

189.    This year, by keeping on its agenda the question of the future of colonial peoples, the United Nations is showing its unshakable will to denounce and destroy the political system of oppression and enslavement of man by man.

190.    It is obvious that so long as the evil consequences of colonialism remain, so long as dark spots persist in any part of the African continent, we cannot consider the United Nations to have fully discharged its noble task. That is why we continue to deplore the provocative arrogance of Portugal and the challenge flung at the world conscience by South Africa. We shall not cease to proclaim that so-called Portuguese Africa wants to recover, in fraternal friendship, its full dignity; it wants to be free, independent and sovereign in order- to work out its own destiny.

191.    It is time to root out the system of apartheid which is gnawing at the southern part of Africa. The Central African Republic makes a solemn appeal to the goodwill of all nations which love peace and justice to bring to a successful conclusion the noble task incumbent upon all of us, great or small: to put an end to all these contradictions. The United Nations needs the full and unconditional support of all its Members.

192.    For twenty years a country of about 20 million inhabitants has been throwing down an arrogant and humiliating challenge to an Organization representing 2,000 million people. For years a colony of foreigners installed on part of the African continent has refused to recognize the indigenous inhabitants’ right to exist. It has condemned them to isolation and slow but sure death. By a Judgement unfortunately devoid of any foundation, either juridical or moral, the International Court of Justice, as we have had occasion to state, has just committed one of the most flagrant denials of justice in its history by refusing to hand down a judgement on the substance of the case. That is why my Government was among the first to proclaim its disappointment and indignation in the face of such a judgement, which, as many delegations have stressed, has disturbed countries which, like mine, of course, believe in the rule ox law.

193.    Consequently, the delegation of the Central African Republic considers that the present twenty-first session of the United Nations General Assembly ought to put an end to the problem of South West Africa. To this end there is one imperative solution: the simple revocation of the Mandate under which the administration of the Territory of South West Africa was vested in the Republic of South Africa.

194.    A solution must also be found for the problem of Southern Rhodesia. The whole world must keep its eyes on the United Kingdom. That country possesses all the means necessary to break the resistance of the minority Government and to prevent the emergence of a new South Africa.

195.    The work done by the United Kingdom in the matter of decolonization has been considerable. We have just applauded the accession to national sovereignty of Guyana and Basutoland, following that of many other African States. We believe that the time has come for the United Kingdom to satisfy the legitimate claims of the majority in Southern Rhodesia.

196.    We in the Central African Republic think that unless the arms race is promptly ended once and for all it will remain the decisive cause of the outbreak of armed conflicts through which men will believe they can settle various inevitable disputes. We, for our part, think that other, peaceful means must be used to avert disputes of any importance or to stop them in good time. The Central African Republic believes in the virtue of negotiation devoid of all passion and of all verbal or armed violence.

197.    It is from this peaceful point of view that my country hopes to see an end to a certain number of conflicts which are disturbing certain parts of the world and seriously threatening international peace and security.

198.    There comes to mind first the distressing problem of Viet-Nam. The people of the Central African Republic, moved by the tragedy which is taking place in that part of Asia, appeals to the reason of the belligerents of all sides and solemnly adjures them to do everything in their power to find a negotiated solution to the plight of the Viet-Namese, who, we ardently hope, will in the final reckoning decide their own destiny. We are in favour of self-determination. The United Nations, in our humble opinion, is empowered to organize negotiations to this end under its own aegis. In this way hostilities would be rapidly ended, for it is highly desirable that peace should reign both in North and in South Viet-Nam. It is hardly conceivable that two brother peoples should live continually In a state of war to the benefit of foreign Powers, because of a question of prestige for one side or the other.

199.    If the kind of negotiation we hope for, under United Nations auspices, were to meet with the refusal of one of the parties concerned, the Central African Republic would draw the necessary conclusions. But, for pity’s sake, let thought be given to this before it is too late.

200.    Next, in the Middle East, the distressing problem of the Arab refugees remains untouched, despite the determination of the United Nations to settle the matter by peaceful means. We once again insist, with all the vigour at our command, on the virtue of direct dialogue, of negotiation devoid of all political passion between the parties concerned. We do not intend to approve of anything that might directly or indirectly lead to war, cold or hot, localized or generalized. History has eloquently shown how painful the consequences of this can be. We cannot remain insensitive to the legitimate distress of separated families desperately awaiting the reconstruction of their destroyed homes.

201.    Such a situation calls for a humane solution. But this cannot really be found without the application of the principle of self-determination. There lies the possible path to reunification the prelude to a desired political stability.

202.    Following the same line of thought, we say that everything must be done to bring about the peaceful reunification both of Germany and of Korea. The United Nations must study all this with goodwill. Its competence and authority in these grave problems must be recognized by all the parties concerned.

203.    We in the Central African Republic agree that the United Nations should retain its universal character. But, in our humble opinion, a country must not enter the Organization until it has furnished proof of its will to respect the sacred principle of peaceful coexistence and, above all, the principle of nonintervention in the internal affairs of other States. The People’s Republic of China does not seem to fulfil these fundamental conditions. The Central African Republic consequently opposes its admission to the United Nations. My country bases its opposition on its own experience and on facts which serve only to discredit this giant, China, which is greedy for hegemony and world subversion.

204.    I should now like to address myself to the Secretary-General. I have to convey to him, from the Government of the Central African Republic, a well- deserved message of tribute for his qualities as a courageous, honest and devoted servant. My people and Government in the Central African Republic have always followed with close interest all the efforts made by U Thant. That is why my Government, through our Permanent Representative to the United Nations, strongly urged him, last June, to accept a new term of office in the post he has so admirably filled,

205.    He knows that the Central African Republic has always shared his joys. He must therefore know that the Central African Republic cannot remain indifferent to his disappointments. But we beg U Thant nevertheless to understand that any human enterprise entails disappointments. His services are all the more useful to our Organisation because a threat of permanent insecurity seems to hover over mankind. That is why the Government of the Central African Republic and its people associate themselves with friendly countries in asking our devoted Secretary-General to make himself once again available in order to watch at the bedside of the great world family, which has recently been laid low by a temporary, but nonetheless, serious, illness.

206.    I should not like to leave this rostrum without saying a few words on the conditions of work and, in particular, the present structure of the United Nations. To our great satisfaction we have already achieved the enlargement of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council. For this reason, in view of the flagrant denial of justice of which the International Court of Justice was guilty last July, my Government considers that the composition of that important body must be enlarged, and without delay.

207.    My Government also considers it essential for the pursuit of our work that the use of the French language in the Organization be maintained and developed. In our view this question is closely bound up with the question of increasing the proportion of French-speaking staff in the Secretariat. Any move in favour of the French language must, to be effective, be accompanied by steps towards the linguistic diversification of the Secretariat at all levels, but particularly, we would hope, at the middle or upper levels. It is precisely in this field that the present situation obliges us to note that at the level I have just mentioned the proportion of French-speaking staff is far from commensurate with the number of French-speaking countries at present represented in the United Nations, On this subject the report of the Secretary-General is particularly illuminating. We certainly appreciate at its true worth the considerable effort already made by the Secretary-General, but we think that this effort can and should be pursued.

208. The Central African Republic is part of the great family of French-speaking countries. But it is not out of sentiment that our delegation associates itself with all the speakers who have raised the problem of developing the use of French in the United Nations. It is rather a question of justice, for it cannot be just that one of the principal working languages should be relegated to second place by comparison with the other.

209.    The rapid survey I have just made is not exhaustive. Many other problems at present call for the attention of the United Nations. I would mention among others the questions of Cyprus, of peace-keeping operations and of human rights. The United Nations is once again confronted with an agenda containing numerous items of vital importance for the future of mankind.

210.    My delegation is convinced that the General Assembly, at its twenty-first session, as at previous sessions, will discuss these questions with complete objectivity and a proper concern to find acceptable solutions. The Central African Republic expresses its ardent hope that all Member countries, great and small, will school themselves to make it possible for the United Nations effectively to fulfil the difficult mission entrusted to it in the interest of the whole world.
