151.     I wish to congratulate Mr. Pazhwak on his unanimous election as President of this twenty-first session of the General Assembly. He has served his great country in a very distinguished manner as its representative to the United Nations, and his election underlines the confidence and faith of the whole membership of this Organization in his wisdom and ability. Abdul Rahman Pazhwak is not a stranger to Indonesia. He has visited my country more than once on missions of historic importance. My delegation joins the President in the hope that this session, combining wisdom with accomplishments, will indeed become known as the "Assembly of Reason".

152.    My delegation also associates itself with previous speakers in welcoming the Republic of Guyana as a Member of this Organization.

153.    The present Government of Indonesia, since its formation about two months ago, has declared itself committed to implementing the programme which has been laid down by the People's Consultative Assembly, the highest policy-making body in Indonesia. The programme contains the following four points: (a) the stabilization and development of the country's economy; (b) preparation for the general elections to be held within two years; (c) an active and independent foreign policy; and (d) the struggle against colonialism and imperialism. Of these four points, the Indonesian Government puts the emphasis upon the stabilization and development of the nation's economy. I do not need to elaborate upon the present economic situation in Indonesia, as the Assembly is fully cognizant of it. My Government believes that the implementation of the other parts of the programme will be very much facilitated if inflation is checked, the country's economic 
infrastructure rehabilitated and improved, production increased and the balance of trade redressed.

154.    In the field of foreign relations, the Indonesian Government will continue to pursue its traditional policy of non-alignment — an independent and active foreign policy. Indonesia will continue to support the struggle of all peoples under colonial rule who are fighting for freedom and independence. Indonesia will continue, as it has always done in the past, to work together with other nations in the common struggle against imperialism and colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.

155.    The Assembly is aware that this independent and active foreign policy, this policy of non-alignment, aims at lessening regional and world tension in order to establish peace. World peace will enable the developing nations to concentrate on the achievement of the welfare and prosperity of their respective peoples, in co-operation with other nations.

156.    It is in this search for peace and friendship that Indonesia has reached agreement with a neighbouring and brotherly country, the Federation of Malaysia, to end their dispute. The causes of that unfortunate dispute are known to this Assembly. The recent agreement, signed on 11 August 1966, stands out as proof of the determination of both nations to live in peace and amity with each other. The re-establishment of peace between Indonesia and Malaysia is a very significant fact. It shows that we, the developing nations in Asia, if left alone, are able to solve our differences and disputes in a peaceful manner.

157.    It is against this background that my delegation views the disputes and conflicts in our immediate surroundings of South-East Asia. In Viet-Nam the conflict which has been going on for many years has caused thousands of deaths and great destruction. The Indonesian people, who had the same experience during their fight for independence, understand and share the innermost feelings of our brothers in Viet-Nam. In the words of the Secretary-General, U Thant, our hearts go out to them. The Government of Indonesia will support every sincere effort to put an end to the war in Viet-Nam, in order that the Viet-Namese people may decide its future by itself in peace without outside interference.

158.    It is not my intention to elaborate upon the many important items contained in the agenda of this session. My delegation hopes to give its views at the appropriate time when those problems are discussed in the Committees. However, I should like to express the view of the Indonesian Government regarding one problem which is being discussed by the Assembly. It is regarding the question of South West Africa. I shall not go into the details of the issue. Many of the representatives have already contributed to the discussions and have catalogued the events that have happened during these years and the decisions already taken by the General Assembly in the period of the past twenty years. My delegation considers the problem of South West Africa as one of the most acute issues of colonialism. The freedom-loving peoples of the world expect that the Assembly at this session will finally leave the years of dilemma behind it and that it will arrive at firm decisions which, when translated into action, will herald the arrival of a new era of freedom and independence for the unfortunate people of South West Africa.

159.    The decision of my Government to resume full participation in the activities of the United Nations shows beyond the slightest doubt its determination to co-operate with other members in realizing the purposes and aims of the Organization as embodied in the Charter. My delegation is happy to note that efforts to improve the structure and machinery of the Organization have started to bear fruit. It will cooperate with like-minded delegations towards making this Organization and its organs more representative and more effective.

160.    Finally, my delegation would like to add its voice to the appeal made by the representative who spoke before me that our highly esteemed friend, U Thant, will remain in our midst as Secretary-General.