127.    Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of Japan, I wish to express to you our heartiest congratulations on your election as President of the General Assembly at its twenty-first session. I am confident that with your high wisdom and your wealth of experience in this world organ, you will successfully lead us to many significant accomplishments during this important session. I wish especially to add that your election, with the wholehearted support of the Afro-Asian countries of which my country is one, not only gives us very deep satisfaction, but also makes us even more aware of our responsibility to co-operate with you for the smooth and harmonious work of this session.

128.    Let me also at this time express our profound thanks and appreciation to our former President, Mr. Amintore Fanfani, the Foreign Minister of Italy. Demonstrating his wealth of experience in the field of diplomacy, he guided the work of the twentieth session in a manner that has greatly enhanced the authority and prestige of the United Nations.

129.    Also at this time I should like to pay to U Thant, our Secretary-General, the very warm tribute of the Japanese delegation and Government. For some years now, a period covering many of the most difficult and trying days of the United Nations, U Thant has graced the eminence of his office with very rare qualities of ripe wisdom and quiet leadership. His dedication to the cause of peace and his devotion to the tasks of peace have deeply inspired us and, although we sympathize with him for the painful frustrations he has encountered from time to time in the course of his work, surely the ideal of peace that he has served so well by far outweighs all other considerations. My delegation is very glad to note that the Secretary- General made it clear that he would consider remaining in office during this session.

130.    It is gratifying to know that the Indonesian Government has decided to resume its full co-operation with the United Nations, starting with this session of the General Assembly. This is very pleasant news indeed and a happy augury for the beginning of the twenty-first session. My delegation takes great pleasure in the fact that Indonesia, for which Japan has always cherished feelings of deep friendship, as a neighbouring country of Asia, has made the decision to rejoin us in our work to build world peace through the United Nations. We support it whole-heartedly.

131.    To the delegation of Guyana, I offer my warm congratulations on the admission of their country and welcome them to our midst.

132.    The Japanese delegation entertains high expectations and confidence that Indonesia and Guyana will contribute their full share to the work of the United Nations for peace, for freedom, for human rights and for economic and social development.

133.    Ten years have passed since Japan became a Member of the United Nations and in these ten years we have seen this Organization greatly enlarged in membership, and we have seen it vigorously carry out its tasks in various fields: the maintenance of world peace, the independence of colonial countries and peoples, and economic and social development. This is a matter of congratulation for the sake of the well-being of the world and of mankind.

134.    One of the most important roles played by the United Nations is that by the very ideals for which it stands, it lights the way for the future of humanity. In the diplomacy of every country there are always two aspects: one to protect the actual national interests and the other to contribute to the realization of the ideals of mankind at large. Certainly, these two aspects are closely linked like the two sides of a coin. In the world of today, the peace and prosperity of any one nation are closely interrelated with the peace and prosperity of the world as a whole. Each Government should not only, therefore, endeavour to protect the interests of its nation and State, but should also bear in mind the legitimate ideals of the future of the international community and make continuous efforts for their realization. Any nation which is lacking in awareness of these, to us, self-evident facts, or which fails to behave in accordance with them, is not entitled to occupy an honourable place in the community of nations.

135.    The ideal of the world community is to realize for every nation the equal enjoyment of a peaceful and abundant life, regardless of race, creed or religion. On the means of attaining this ideal, a common standpoint is evident in the basic attitude proclaimed by almost all countries belonging to the world community, whatever their political ideology. This is to so nurture and strengthen the United Nations that eventually it may be fully entrusted with all matters relating to international peace and the security of every nation, that it may provide dynamic leadership in the progress of mankind in the fields of basic human rights, economic and social advancement and other endeavours, thus enabling this Organization to make positive contributions to the building of an enduring world peace.

136.    It is only natural that the nations which, through two world wars, suffered appalling miseries resulting from a world community based upon selfish national interest, should now come to share these common ideals.

137.    However, under the ever-changing circumstances of international politics, our ideals seem at times to draw close to reality and at other times to appear so remote and shrouded in the mists of fantasy that our ideals themselves seem to be no more than castles in the air. The United Nations as it now is, is still not close to what we would like it to be. But we could hardly over-estimate the value of the United Nations as a place where we affirm to each other the ideals of humanity and pledge our utmost efforts to achieve them.

138.    A major development of historic significance in the latter half of the twentieth century is the collapse of the system of domination and subordination of one people by another and the creation of a new social order, based on the principle of equality. The role played by the United Nations in this whole process has indeed been great. The principle of independence of colonies proclaimed by the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which was adopted by the General Assembly at its fifteenth session, has now become one of the guiding principles in the society of nations. Regrettable though it is that some areas still remain where this principle has not been implemented — because of stubborn resistance to the tide of change — the obvious fact is that the great drive for the independence of colonial countries and peoples has now entered into its final stage.

139.    Colonial independence does not mean that all problems have been completely settled. True, the newly independent countries are earnestly endeavouring to develop their national future by their own will and abilities, but it is also true that they must first establish political stability in the areas to which they belong if they are to give full and effective play to their efforts of nation-building.

140.    Our Organization has made many contributions to the political stability of these areas. It has devoted much of its energy to this end. This is evident from the fact that most of the peace-keeping operations of this Organization since its founding have been carried out in these areas. The solution of the economic and social problems of the newly Independent developing nations is even more difficult than the solution of the problems of political independence. 

141.    The situation in which some people in the world enjoy prosperity and a high standard of living while most of the others are constantly menaced by conditions of poverty, starvation and disease, can be a cause of friction and discord among nations and peoples. In order to remove this cause, the United Nations and its specialized agencies have made great efforts in such fields as the development of industry and agriculture, the popularization of education and the improvement of public welfare.

142.    The independence of colonies, the political stability of the developing areas and development assistance to these areas — these have been among the central activities which the United Nations has performed with considerable success. Through these processes our Organization is actually contributing toward the establishment of world peace.

143.    Following the Second World War, strife, unrest and stagnation prevailed in Asia and impeded progress. But a new and encouraging trend has recently begun to emerge. First to be noted is the trend toward co-operation and collaboration among the nations of the region. In the past, Asia, compared with other regions, has had fewer opportunities to discuss common problems for the purpose of promoting intra-regional co-operation. But now a number of such opportunities have presented themselves. At the beginning of this year, a ministerial conference for economic development in South-East Asia was held in Tokyo, and in June the First Ministerial Meeting for Asian and Pacific Co-operation was held in Seoul. In November, the inaugural meeting of the Board of Governors of the Asian Development Bank and, in December, a conference for South-East Asian agricultural development will also take place in Tokyo. The United Nations Commission for Asia and the Far East continues its broad and very important activities concerning economic and social problems in the Asian area, and one of the products of its efforts is the Asian Development Bank. This is the result, no less, of self-help by Asian countries with the co-operation of the more highly developed nations.

144.    Another trend to be noted is that, in the place of confrontation and tension, there is now a tendency to settle disputes between neighbouring countries by peaceful means, based on a spirit of understanding and friendship. There has been, for example, a normalization of diplomatic relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea, realized last December, twenty years after World War II, which has opened up a new relationship of friendship and amity between the two countries. There was the summit conference, held in Tashkent between India and Pakistan in January of this year, which resulted in a cease-fire in the armed conflict arising from the Kashmir dispute. Still fresh in our memory is the dispute between Indonesia and Malaysia which, after three tense years, came to an end last August, restoring a relationship of friendship between them. This happy development is the result of eager and ceaseless efforts by the leaders of those two countries since this spring.

145.    While it is thus gratifying to note these developments which indicate a steady new trend toward greater political stability and closer regional cooperation in Asia, dark clouds still hang over that part of the world and we remain constantly under the danger of great disaster until they are dispersed.

146.    The gravest problem now confronting us in South-East Asia is how to achieve a peaceful solution of the issue of Viet-Nam. There, bloodshed and destruction go on unabated with no prospect of settlement. How truly regrettable that valuable human lives and resources of all kinds which ought to be directed towards the construction and development of this vast region are thus being wasted in fighting. At this moment when, as I have just mentioned, there is a developing trend throughout Asia favouring the solution of problems through peaceful talks, I earnestly hope that the conflict in Viet-Nam also may reach an early peaceful solution through discussions. To bring this about, it is essential for both parties to stop the fighting and sit down at the conference table.

147.    The United States has repeatedly declared its readiness to enter into discussions without any preconditions, while the North Viet-Namese authorities and the Viet Cong have maintained the attitude that as long as their claims are not recognized, there can be no possibility of their agreeing to negotiations. I strongly desire that the communist side, taking into consideration the appeals for peace made by so many of the world's nations and leaders, might show a more responsive and constructive attitude towards a peaceful solution. On this point, I regard the statement made by the representative of the United States yesterday as being a very important and constructive one which merits our serious consideration. At the same time, my country wishes to express its firm determination to seize every opportunity that may present itself in the future and to continue its all-out efforts in the pursuit of a just peace. The question of China, no less than that of Viet-Nam, is one of paramount importance, for it has such a close bearing on the peace and security of Asia and indeed of the whole world. Practically every international problem that arises on the continent of Asia is related in one way or another to the question of China. 

148.    As my delegation has repeatedly stated at every past session of the General Assembly, the China question is by its very nature one of great difficulty and complexity, so much so that its solution is far from easy. I should point out that one of the main reasons which have made the solution of this intractable problem even more difficult is the attitude of the People's Republic of China. Compare, if you will, the attitudes taken on the question of Viet-Nam by the various countries concerned and you will note that the position of the People's Republic of China is conspicuously lacking in flexibility. In order to resolve the China problem and the closely related problems of different areas on China's vast periphery, a number of ways and means might be envisaged, both in and out of this Organization, such as negotiations between the parties directly involved.

149.    I believe above all, however, that the essential prerequisite for peace and security in Asia and in the world is that the People's Republic of China should face the problems concerning it with a co-operative attitude, based upon confidence in the goodwill of other countries. The attitude should also reflect a recognition of the simple fact that the nations of the world, different though they may be in political ideology, all aspire to peace.

150.    The attitude of my delegation on the question of the representation of China in the United Nations has been repeatedly explained in past sessions of the Assembly, and therefore I would do no more than summarize it briefly at this time. We believe that the question of China is a question of vital importance directly affecting the peace and security of our present world. And the question of Chinese representation in the United Nations, we believe, is an important question which touches the very core of the China question. It is so important that it must he examined with the utmost caution, based on a realistic and balanced appraisal of all the factors involved. Like many other important issues to be decided by the General Assembly, it should be dealt with as an important question requiring for decision a two-thirds majority vote. I might add that in the light of recent statements by the leaders of Peking, the world situation does not appear to have reached a state that would make objectively possible a satisfactory solution of the question of Chinese representation at this time. My delegation remains hopeful that the General Assembly will continue to deal with this question in the same careful manner as at previous sessions of the Assembly.

151.    The changes that have swept over the African continent since the Second World War have been of historic proportions and importance, Africa today is making assiduous efforts to throw off the yoke of colonial domination and mould its destiny by its own will and power. The newly independent countries of Africa have formed the Organization of African Unity and are thus exerting their utmost energies to establish a system of regional co-operation aiming at African solidarity and unity. Such constructive efforts serve in effect to facilitate the establishment of cooperative systems in other regions.

152.    It is regrettable, however, that there still remain peoples in Africa who are denied independence, contrary to their legitimate aspirations. Parallel with the problem of colonial independence is the problem of racial discrimination. The question of southern Africa, together with the question of Viet-Nam and the question of China in Asia, is today one of the world's major political issues.

153.    On the question of South West Africa, the International Court of Justice has recently delivered a judgement on the cases instituted by the Governments of Ethiopia and Liberia. The Court however did not judge the principal substantive issues of the case, and did not justify the policies persistently practised in South West Africa by the Republic of South Africa in total disregard of numerous resolutions of the United Nations. Japan insists that the Territory of South West Africa, presently administered by the Republic of South Africa under the terms of the Mandate, should be allowed to progress steadily towards self-government and independence. We also insist that the policies of apartheid now being practised in South West Africa should be ended immediately as a matter of course. My delegation believes that the present session of the General Assembly should make a comprehensive and careful study of the juridical and political procedures necessary to achieve these aims.

154.    As to the question of Southern Rhodesia, Japan is consistently opposed to the unilateral declaration of independence by which it intends to perpetuate white minority rule. From this standpoint, we have faithfully carried out the required measures, including economic measures, in conformity with Security Council resolutions, whatever the strains they may place on our national economy. As a result, Japan's imports from Southern Rhodesia have been reduced practically to nil. We are determined to make every possible effort in the future, in collaboration with friendly nations, to achieve the objectives of the Security Council resolutions.

155.    Whether it be the question of South West Africa or the question of Southern Rhodesia, the common feature looming large behind both is racial discrimination. It is most deplorable that the Republic of South
Africa, notwithstanding the condemnation expressed by the United Nations in a series of resolutions over a long period of time, has not only failed to renounce its policies of racial discrimination but has, rather, tightened the system of such discrimination. We strongly appeal to the Republic of South Africa to abandon forthwith its policy of apartheid and take a common step towards the realization of the ideals of all mankind. In the meantime, Japan pledges to continue to carry out its arms embargo against South Africa in accordance with Security Council resolutions.

156.    National independence and racial equality are the main currents of history, and nothing can stem this tide. The claim for political and social equality of races is no less than a voice of the human conscience. I sincerely hope that the countries administering southern Africa will fully realize this fact and take positive steps to settle these problems in consonance with the tide of history.

157.    As I have stated earlier, the United Nations is an organ embodying in itself the lofty ideals of mankind. Indeed, we who are gathered in this Assembly are truly making world history. Realizing then that what we do here will have a far-reaching impact on future generations, we must act with a sense of grave responsibility. There is no doubt but that, on questions of colonial independence and racial discrimination, basic justice is on the side of the Afro-Asian countries. In choosing the means of achieving the aim of human justice, however, we must constantly keep in mind the heavy responsibilities which rest upon us.

158.    I have spoken on some of the problems that confront the nations of Asia and Africa. To promote the economic prosperity of the developing regions of the world and to enable their inhabitants to enjoy social well-being—these are preconditions to establishing and maintaining peace and security in these regions. The problem of economic and social development of the developing regions is thus not simply an economic and social problem. It must be understood and dealt with as a task of building peace.

159.    Needless to say, the economic and social development of the developing regions is possible only through co-operation between the developed and the developing nations. The fact that the 1960's have been designated the United Nations Development Decade and that the United Nations is exerting its intense energies to the problem of development is thus a matter of great historic significance.

160.    Although we have just passed the mid-point of the Development Decade, we cannot describe the achievements of the first half as being wholly satisfactory. But through the co-operation of the Member States of our Organization, there are observable signs of steady progress. In the course of last year, a number of basic tasks were accomplished. The establishment of the institution of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was completed; a new United Nations Organization for Industrial Development was established; the United Nations Development Programme was consolidated; and the World Food Programme was also expanded and put on a permanent basis. Thus the United Nations is now expected to play an ever more active role in these important fields in the years to come.

161.    Parallel with these efforts, all the specialized agencies have also strengthened assistance activities to the developing countries in their respective fields of competence. And we should not overlook the many other projects and programmes that are being carried out on a multilateral and bilateral basis, It is indeed gratifying to see these intense efforts being made ceaselessly, both within and outside the framework of the United Nations.

162.    Next year, the second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is to be held. The key to the success of the Conference lies, I firmly believe, in a common and concerted effort by both the developed and the developing countries on the basis of mutual understanding, trust and goodwill to find measures for the solution of the problems before them. Japan, on its part, is prepared to make every possible contribution towards the success of the Conference.

163.    In most developing countries, notably in Asia, the most aggravating problem today is that of agriculture, especially the creeping food crisis in relation to sharp population increases. The solution of food shortage and the raising of agricultural productivity, taken together, constitute one of the most urgent and important problems in these areas. It is encouraging that the gravity of these problems is now being seriously recognized throughout the world. Japan, on her part, is determined to lend her utmost co-operation to the agricultural development of the developing countries. It is because Japan fully realizes the grave importance of the food problem that she is convening the Conference on Agricultural Development in Tokyo at the end of this year with the participation of the countries of South-East Asia. We are confident that this Conference, through the co-operative efforts of South-East Asian countries, will make very significant contributions to the solution of the food problems of the area.

164.    As I have stated, the problems of economic and social development in the developing countries are so varied and complex that their early solutions will not come easily. Although Japan has her problems at home, she has made every possible effort to increase her assistance to the developing countries. With the goal of diverting 1 per cent of our national income to the economic and social development of the developing countries as early as possible, we are determined to expand our assistance efforts to the limit of our national resources.

165.    The most important objective of the United Nations is the maintenance of international peace and security. The Security Council, on which rests the primary responsibility in this regard, started its work at the beginning of this year with an enlarged array of members. In recent times, there has been a noticeable tendency towards consultations among the Council members, thus avoiding confrontations, and as a consequence the veto has not actually been exercised by a permanent member of the Council. For this important agency of the United Nations to function smoothly and efficiently, it is essential that there be full co-operation, not only among the permanent members, but also among the non-permanent members as well. Recognizing this important requirement, Japan is determined to co-operate fully with other members, as it has endeavoured to do thus far, in the examination of the various problems that come before the Council.

166.    Since the nineteenth session of the General Assembly, this Organization has had many intense discussions on the problem of United Nations peacekeeping operations, but it is a matter of regret that little has been produced in the way of tangible results. The question of how to carry out effectively the peace-keeping functions of this Organization and the question of how to ensure effective financial backing for these operations are vital problems on which rests so much the fate of the United Nations. The entire membership of our Organization must, I submit, fully realize the importance of these questions and join in vigorous co-operative efforts toward their early and satisfactory solution.

167.    On the subject of peace-keeping operations. I suggested at the last session of the Assembly that representatives of this Organization might be posted permanently in the various geographical regions of the world as a preliminary step for the peaceful settlement of disputes. My delegation believes that the United Nations should further study suggestions of this kind.

168.    The financial ills which be set the United Nations, arising as a result of its past peace-keeping operations, require urgent solution. I believe that all Members of the United Nations, recalling the agreement reached at the nineteenth session of the General Assembly and the historical background which led to the establishment of the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations, and considering also the present financial situation of the United Nations, which has now been clarified, should exert constructive efforts to restore health to United Nations finances.

169.    At the last session of the Assembly [1339th meeting], I stated that Japan was prepared to make an appropriate voluntary contribution as our share of the effort. Now that the actual financial situation of the Organization has been clarified, I am glad to inform this Assembly that Japan intends soon to make a contribution of $2.5 million.

170.    I should like next to express our thoughts on a question which is closely related to the maintenance of international peace and security— the disarmament question.

171.    With the present world climate, it is difficult to attain immediately the goal of general and complete disarmament. What is important and essential for us in this situation is to endeavour to work steadily toward that goal, step by step, with calm patience and an unflagging spirit. Even though the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee met on many occasions between January and August this year and made no substantial progress, the very fact that it did meet so often and engage in intensive discussions, and then decided to resume its meetings after the present General Assembly, reflects, I believe, the earnest desire of the world for disarmament.

172.    The focal point of the disarmament problem today is the question of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Despite the efforts made, the Eighteen- Nation Committee has failed to agree on the coordination of draft treaties on disarmament. At the twentieth session of the General Assembly, I expressed the view that in making such a treaty due consideration should be given to the security of each nation and that the voices of both nuclear and non-nuclear Powers should be respected in the spirit that all States should equally share the responsibilities and the obligations. We also expressed the view that, after the effectuation of a treaty of non-proliferation, conferences of the parties to the treaty should be held, not only to review its implementation but also to assess from time to time the disarmament efforts made by the nuclear Powers. I hope that all the nations concerned will fully examine the various points, including those I have mentioned, and surmount the difficulties, so that a treaty for the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons may be concluded without further delay.

173.    In the light of the fact that the total prohibition of nuclear weapons testing is an effective means not only to achieve nuclear disarmament but also to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, there should be an early ban on underground testing, which has not yet been prohibited by international agreement. We are aware that there are serious disagreements among the nations concerned regarding the question of international control of the underground test ban, such as on-site inspection, verification, and others. Recently, the Swedish Government has proposed the idea of international exchange of seismological data, or the creation of the so-called "detection club". While its function is of a technical character involving the exchange of seismological data, it would be greatly welcomed if such an activity, though unspectacular, would contribute to eliminating the deadlock in realizing the prohibition of underground testing. My Government intends to make every possible contribution to the development and success of the "detection club".

174.    At this time when many nations are making serious efforts to achieve non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the total banning of nuclear tests, Communist China and France have conducted tests in the atmosphere again this year for the purpose of developing nuclear weapons. This is most regrettable. I hope very earnestly that both nations will respect the desire of the world and co-operate in the international disarmament effort.

175.    As a nation which has actually experienced the disaster of nuclear war, Japan is ever ready to participate actively in the common endeavour of all nations to achieve disarmament.

176.    Science and technology have made many brilliant achievements in the twentieth century, especially in the still early latter half. The swift and dramatic progress which we have seen in the exploration of outer space is now transforming that vast area, once a world of the imagination, into a new arena of human activity. This new province offers mankind a great and challenging opportunity to realize its lofty ideals removed from the conflicting national interests on earth. It is most appropriate and timely that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should submit to this session of the General Assembly a report [A/6431] on a draft treaty governing the activities of States in the exploration and use of outer space, the moon and other celestial bodies. I sincerely hope that this epoch-making treaty, aimed at the establishment of law and order in outer space, may be concluded as soon as possible so that we may utilize, in a spirit of co-operation, outer space and the celestial bodies for the benefit of all mankind.

177.    I have stated the basic positions and aspirations of the Japanese delegation regarding the ideals of mankind and the United Nations, the political and economic problems confronting Asia, Africa and other developing areas, the United Nations peace-keeping operations, the disarmament issues and other questions.

178.    The progress of science and technology has been so remarkable that man may now explore the universe; but has the world community in which we live progressed as much? We, who have at heart the progress of our world, must not lag behind. We must join our efforts to strengthen the United Nations, which is the embodiment of our aspiration, so that it may become a truly effective organization for achieving the peace and prosperity of the world. For this high purpose the Japanese Government is determined to play its full part.

179.    Mr. President, I earnestly hope that this session of the General Assembly, under your able leadership, will accomplish many fruitful results, enhance the authority of the United Nations, and contribute substantially to world peace and prosperity. To this my delegation pledges its full effort and co-operation.