79.    Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to express to you my warmest congratulations and those of my Government and delegation upon your unanimous election to the Presidency of the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.

80.    In view of the traditional brotherly relations that bind our two countries, I feel proud to see as President of the General Assembly a distinguished son of our own region, a region noted for its ancient culture and civilization. Indeed, this demonstrates that the nations which created a great culture and civilization are still, in this age as they were in their illustrious past, a positive and dynamic factor in the making of history, in peace and security and in accordance with right and justice.

81.    We believe that your talent and experience, wisdom and good judgement, and the profound understanding you have of the political, economic and social life of the international community will enable the General Assembly, during its present session, to overcome its present difficulties, enlarge the scope of international co-operation in the economic and social fields, and find solutions for the political disputes that threaten world peace and security.

82.    I should also congratulate our former President, Mr. Fanfani, on the exemplary manner in which he guided the proceedings of the twentieth session, despite its heavy agenda of items accumulated from the nineteenth session. He was a model of firmness and patient skill. To him we express our gratitude and appreciation, and we wish him great success.

83.    I wish to congratulate Guyana on its admission to membership of our Organization. By admitting Guyana into this international family, the United Nations takes one more step towards the achievement of its objectives. I should like also to express our admiration for the integration among its good people which is proceeding so harmoniously; to them we extend best wishes for progress, stability and prosperity.

84.    It is a source of great satisfaction that the circumstances which prevented Indonesia from taking part in the activities of the United Nations for a short period no longer exist. We hope that this great Asian nation will soon resume its role as a bulwark of the principles of right, justice, and peace in this world Organization.

85.    The decision of the Secretary-General not to serve another term is a matter of great concern to the Organization, as this step does not concern his person alone but affects the destiny of the Organization, the more so as the United Nations is torn by the conflict between the big Powers, which pursue their cold war to the detriment of the majority of Members.

86.    The adherence of the Secretary-General to the principles and ideals of the United Nations is in harmony with the sentiments of the small countries, which view the United Nations as the mainstay of their peace and security. Acting in accordance with the dictates of his conscience, the Secretary-General has warned the world against the dangers to the Organization implicit in the present international situation. As a small country, we hold the big Powers primarily responsible for safeguarding the United Nations. It is incumbent upon them, therefore, to co-operate with other countries so that the Organization may fulfil its great task.

87.    The Secretary-General reminded us of our duty to save the United Nations. Kuwait is keenly aware of its responsibilities and takes this opportunity to call upon the Members to do their duty in this respect. Kuwait understands the motives of the Secretary-General's decision and would like to assure him of its support, as he expresses the state of anxiety which now prevails in the Organization.

88.    The Organization is now badly in need of a man of Mr. Thant's gifts — a man with a high sense of responsibility, dedication to human values, and love for his fellow man. We informed Mr. Thant of Kuwait's individual viewpoint, and supported the delegation representing the Asian group which appealed to him in an attempt to dissuade him from his decision. We now pledge our whole-hearted support for any step the General Assembly may take to strengthen the Organization, enhance its prestige, and enable it to do its duty.

89.    World peace and security are challenged by the forces of evil. The great task of construction and development is menaced by greed, selfishness and destruction. The tragedy of the world today is that the poor and developing countries are the victims of the injustice, exploitation and apartheid policies practised by the colonial Powers. The native African population of Southern Rhodesia is the victim of such an outrageous policy.

90.    During its twentieth session the General Assembly adopted three resolutions [2012 (XX), 2022 (XX) and 2024 (XX)] which were in harmony with the dictates of right and justice. It is pertinent to ask what contribution those resolutions have made towards a solution of this question. The preconceived imperialist plan to nullify those resolutions and deprive them of any efficacy has so far been successful. Thus, the people of Zimbabwe have gained nothing. No progress has been made and the foreign minority still retains its control of power and remains an arbiter of the destiny of the whole native population.

91.    The Rhodesian question is still under discussion at the United Nations, awaiting a peaceful solution. The minority which usurped power still defies the United Nations, and the people of Rhodesia are, therefore, entitled to entertain the conviction that there are alternative methods, if peaceful means should fail. Peace-loving nations all over the world pray that the need may not arise for such drastic action.

92.    The problem of the people of Southern Rhodesia is yet another example of the same type of tragic situation the Arabs have been faced with for the past eighteen years. The problem of Rhodesia preoccupies the countries of Asia, Africa and the other developing countries at an advanced stage in their political life, when they are imbued with a spirit of national pride and independence. The injustice suffered by the people of Palestine, however, was inflicted in those unfortunate days when the Afro-Asian continent was under the colonial yoke and a prey to exploitation by various foreign monopolies. As happened recently in Rhodesia, the colonial Power in Palestine had relinquished its responsibilities in favour of the Zionist terrorists who were alien to that country, and thus created a situation which indeed enabled those terrorists to regroup themselves and carry out their plan to usurp the rights of the Arabs of Palestine. Whole towns and villages were evacuated and hundreds of thousands of people were expelled from their homes and driven across the frontier as a result of threats, killings and atrocities.

93.    The international propaganda organs of Zionism have been making painstaking efforts to mislead the world into believing that the Palestine question is merely a problem of refugees. Had this false allegation been true, the past long years would have sufficed to settle those so-called refugees.

94.    The feelings of the people of Palestine have remained unchanged and now, eighteeen years after their expulsion, they are more determined than ever to return to their homes. World Zionism carried out its plan to render the majority of Palestinian Arabs homeless and practised a policy of racial discrimination against the people of occupied Palestine, regardless of their religion. The nazi system, which had been the bane of Europe, was thus introduced by Zionism into our peaceful region. All this was done while its propaganda organs abroad portrayed its form of Government as a model of democracy and equality.

95.    The magnitude of this human tragedy and the harshness of these colonial conditions served as an incentive to the Arabs of Palestine to organize their ranks and proclaim the establishment of their Organization, the Palestine Liberation Organization. Zionist propaganda has been trying to propagate the idea that the Organization is an instrument of terrorism and sabotage. This should cause no surprise as the colonialists have always viewed liberation movements as another form of terrorism and sabotage.

96.    Kuwait believes that the Palestine question is part of the national cause and destiny of the whole Arab nation. It therefore extends its whole-hearted support to this liberation movement and stands by the side of the people of Palestine in their sacred struggle for the liberation of their country from Zionist colonialism.

97.    The world yearns for permanent peace which cannot be established except on the basis of justice. The strength of the oppressor and the powers of evil behind him have neither undermined the will of the Palestinian Arabs nor bred in them a feeling of resignation. How can we ask them to accept a fait accompli? The only solution to the Palestine question must be based on right and justice which dictate the repatriation of the refugees and the restitution of their rights.

98.    Giving aid and support to this colonial Power which operates through the Zionist authorities in occupied Palestine constitutes recognition of oppression, support for aggression and complete disregard of right and justice as solemnly proclaimed by the United Nations Charter.

99.    The services provided by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) are the minimum that the United Nations can do for the Arab refugees. Responsibility for the plight of the refugees lies squarely on the shoulders of the United Nations, which cannot disregard its obligations. It is only to be deplored that the margin of subsistence provided by UNRWA is now exposed to a plot concocted by Zionist and colonialist circles aimed at reducing the funds of the Agency and withholding the ration from the thousands of people who are in need of this form of aid. One may commit a crime. Persistence in criminal conduct, and the sadistic pleasure derived from torturing the victim is, however, inhuman. This is what Zionism and its supporters are doing right now, for to them, the six cents spent on food, medical care and education, constitute a danger, to be averted. At the same time, they want us to believe that it is perfectly valid and legitimate for Zionist agencies, particularly in the United States, to collect millions and millions in contributions, which are turned into deadly weapons and used to strengthen the colonial base in the Middle East.

100.    The injustice suffered by the people of Palestine at the hands of the Zionist terrorists will remain in the history of the United Nations as ineffaceable evidence of the criminal plot concocted by the colonial Powers and their tools. The past ten years have witnessed the triumph of national struggle over colonialism in Asia and Africa. The people of Palestine, whose aspirations are represented in the Palestine Liberation Organization, are determined to regain their rights and return to their usurped homeland.

101.    UNRWA is the only remaining link between the 1,200,000 Palestinians and the United Nations. The responsibility of preserving this Agency lies on the shoulders of the United Nations, and especially on those big Powers which played a decisive role In the colonial plot which created the refugee problem. It is, therefore, the duty of the United Nations and those big Powers to strengthen the Agency and oppose the sinister attempts aimed at liquidating it. No wonder Israel is striving to liquidate it, as its presence is the terrifying ghost and lasting evidence which indicts the crime of Zionism and condemns the very existence of Israel.

102.    Everyone will agree that the funds of the Agency are insufficient for the bare subsistence of the Palestine refugees. We therefore expect the United Nations to take all possible measures to protect Arab property in Palestine and the income derived therefrom. The Palestine refugees who look forward to the day of their return to their usurped homes and country reject all attempts aimed at destroying their identity and liquidating their rights.

103.    South West Africa is one of those regions from which colonialism is reluctant to part and where it is striving to maintain minority rule over the people struggling for their freedom and independence. This colonial plot can be defeated only if decisive solutions are reached. Otherwise, the ruling minority in South West Africa will persist in its colonial policy based on exploitation and apartheid. This problem has had a long life at the United Nations. Seventy-three resolutions have so far been adopted by the General Assembly dealing with various aspects of this problem. Some of these confirmed the rights of the human person and his inalienable right to freedom while others called for boycotting the authorities that maintained the status quo there. The long awaited Judgment of the International Court of Justice was disappointing to all justice and freedom-loving nations. Kuwait would like to associate itself with all the other Governments which deplored the decision of the Court, and takes this opportunity to proclaim its support for the people of South West Africa in their struggle for freedom.

104.    Kuwait would like to reaffirm on this occasion that implementation of the General Assembly resolutions pertaining to territories under Portuguese administration is the obvious way, and a constructive step for liberating those afflicted territories from foreign rule.

105.    We consider the questions of Aden, South Arabia, Oman and the Arabian Gulf as our own because we are part of this region. Restoring normal conditions is a prerequisite to economic, social and political development in this region. Consideration of the question of Aden and South Arabia as a colonial issue has already taken place in the Fourth Committee, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and in the General Assembly,

106.    The prevailing situation in this region portends a violent explosion if the present state of affairs continues. The right of self-determination freely expressed, and ensuring that all political groups take part in choosing the form of Government is the only means for solving this problem. This region suffered for long under oppressive foreign rule and Its people are entitled to a form of Government of their own choice.

107.    General Assembly resolution 2023 (XX) on the question of Aden, adopted during its last session, truly reflects the present state of affairs in this region and implementation of its operative paragraphs will fulfil the basic dictates of justice. During a meeting of the Special Committee on the granting of Independence to colonial countries and peoples, held in Cairo last June [see A/6300/Rev.1, chap. VI, para. 382], a realistic resolution was adopted which defined the best means for solving this problem. Kuwait would like to associate itself with the other Arab countries and the peace- and justice-loving countries in upholding these resolutions; the more so, as it is constantly striving to realize the aspirations of our brethren in Aden and South Arabia.

108.    The question of Oman is another cause for anxiety in the region. The Fourth Committee and the Special Political Committee of the General Assembly have examined this question. Implementation of resolution 2073 (XX), adopted by the General Assembly during its last session, would serve as the basis for solving the existing problem which hinders the progress and development of the region. The people of Oman have an inalienable right to self-determination in accordance with their freely expressed wishes.

109.    The world is watching the grave events in South-East Asia with anxiety and fear. The situation in Viet-Nam reminds us of the scourge of war which twice during half a century brought untold sorrow to mankind. Kuwait is profoundly aware of the tragedy which the people of Viet-Nam are living through in their struggle for freedom, independence and self-determination. It believes that the trend of events in Viet-Nam may drag the whole world into a major catastrophe, as explained by our Secretary-General In his recent statements. Our policy regarding this problem is clear as it stems from our adherence to the United Nations Charter, our participation in a non-aligned group, and our love for peace based on right and justice in accordance with the provisions of our Constitution.

110.    Kuwait condemns all forms of foreign intervention in any part of the world, and particularly in Viet-Nam. The destruction inflicted on the people of Viet-Nam as a result of this intervention cannot be disregarded by peace-loving countries. We believe that Viet-Nam has become a battlefield for the political struggle between the great Powers, and that the ideological conflict is being pursued at the sacrifice of the brave Viet-Namese people.

111.    It is our firm conviction that peace and stability cannot be imposed by force. The question of Viet- Nam is primarily a political one which requires a political solution in which the rights of the people of Viet-Nam must prevail over any other consideration. Kuwait considers the proposals of U Thant for peace in Viet-Nam as a good framework in our quest for positive solutions to this problem which is a threat to world peace.

112.    Kuwait believes that the United Nations cannot achieve universality, nor can it fulfil Its great universal task which embraces the whole human race, nor live in the political realities that prevail in the world today, until it admits to its membership a representative of the great people of China with its teeming millions. One must therefore inevitably come to the conclusion that the exclusion of this great international Power from membership of the United Nations does not promote the cause of world peace.

113.    The developing countries are striving to find solutions to economic problems, which represent their main concern at this time. During the third decade of its life the United Nations should be eager to achieve more in this economic field. The first session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), held in Geneva in 1965, was a constructive step in launching the developing countries on the path of progress and prosperity. The attainment of all or some of these objectives, however, depends upon the important role which the developed countries must play. It depends also upon the measure of financial, economic and technical aid that they extend to developing countries by means of bilateral agreements or through the United Nations. By taking part in this programme, the highly developed countries also serve their own best interests because the benefits achieved in any part of the world accrue to the advantage of neighbouring regions.

114.    The process of development, increasing production and raising the standard of living in developing countries is a long and arduous task which requires planning, research, economic solvency, manpower on the largest possible scale, and human skill of the highest calibre. Hence the goals set by UNCTAD and the useful work which it has done are merely part of the general development programme. The efforts of UNCTAD must be reinforced by industrial development to enable developing countries to exploit their natural resources and increase their industrial production in order to satisfy their domestic consumption needs and to export the surplus to foreign markets. This will provide them with the foreign exchange so badly needed by them.

115.    The decision of the United Nations to hold the International Symposium on Industrial Development and to establish the Organization for Industrial Development has given proof of its understanding of these basic needs and reaffirmed its determination to seek positive and constructive solutions to these problems, based on the sharing of responsibility between the developed and developing countries alike.

116.    Kuwait is keenly aware of its responsibilities and duties in this field of international co-operation aimed at helping developing countries to improve their economic systems. As a further proof of its eagerness to shoulder these responsibilities, it proclaims its intention to continue in the future the work which it has been doing in the past, both in the Arab world in particular and in the international field in general. Kuwait's sincere and earnest desire became manifest during the Conference on Industrial Development in the Arab countries which was held in Kuwait last spring at the invitation of my Government and with the technical co-operation of the competent authorities in the United Nations. I should like to take this opportunity to express the gratitude and appreciation of the Government of Kuwait for the collaboration of the United Nations in the preparations for the Conference and for making it possible to implement its recommendations.

117.    Actuated by its belief in the importance of economic development, Kuwait has done its share, to the extent that its means allow, in implementing economic development programmes in the Arab world on the basis of mutual benefit, with a sincere and realistic approach and an understanding of the facts of regional and international co-operation. The good results produced by this co-operation between Kuwait and its Arab neighbours have served as an incentive to enlarge its scope. The Kuwaiti National Assembly consequently decided to double the capital of the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development to face the increasing demand for development projects in the region. The Fund's capital resources have thus increased to $560 million.

118.    Let me affirm once more the faith of Kuwait in the United Nations and its adherence to the ideals of the Organization, which are right, justice and co-operation among countries, on the basis of equality in a world enjoying the blessings of security and peace, and imbued with a spirit of selfless and sincere understanding.

119.    In conclusion, I should like to voice the hope that States Members of this international Organization will give it the confidence and support which will enable it to pursue its noble mission in serving mankind and defending the dignity and worth of the human person.