46.     Mr. President, I am pleased to express to you personally, and on behalf of my delegation, our delight at your election as President of the General Assembly. We take special pride in your election, because your country is a member of our Afro-Asian family, which has benefited from your long experience and outstanding competence.

47.    The confidence that the General Assembly has shown in you rewards your unceasing efforts to promote respect for the principles of humanity and justice on which this international Organization was founded. Your election also bears witness to the General Assembly’s esteem for your great country, with which Libya has maintained, over the centuries, close historical, spiritual and cultural ties. The contribution made by Afghanistan to the Arab-Islamic culture which embraces our two countries is, in great part, responsible for this great flourishing human civilization.

48.    The Libyan delegation is confident, Mr. President, that your wisdom, tact and long experience will ensure the smooth conduct of this session's work and the successful conclusion of its deliberations.

49.    I also wish to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to your distinguished predecessor, Signor Amintore Fanfani, who conducted the proceedings of the twentieth session with remarkable ability,

50.    The entire world has learned with deep regret of the Secretary-General's decision not to make himself available for another term of office. Libya, which has joined the other Member States in expressing concern and in appealing to U Thant to reconsider continuing in office, welcomes his acceptance to remain until the end of the present session. Although we are aware of the various international circumstances underlying the Secretary-General's decision, we have not entirely lost hope that U Thant will remain in office for another term at this critical juncture in which the world Organization is acquiring greater responsibilities.

51.    Meanwhile, the Libyan delegation can only express to U Thant its full appreciation for his formidable and unceasing efforts since he assumed the position of Secretary-General to further the cause of international peace and security and the fulfilment of the objectives and principles of this Organization.

52.    The unanimity in urging the Secretary-General to stay on is, in itself, a positive proof of the international community's recognition and esteem for U Thant's integrity, sagacity and impartiality in his service to the cause of peace in conformity with the principles of the Charter.

53. I should also like to express a warm welcome, on behalf on my country, to Guyana on becoming a new Member of the United Nations. We wish its Government and people constant progress and prosperity. We look forward to the day when the United Nations will encompass all other regions and territories and when the liquidation of colonialism is finally achieved. That would undoubtedly tie instrumental in strengthening the world Organization by ensuring its complete representation and providing a wider forum in which the critical issues of peace could tie discussed.

54.    We also wish to express our delight at Indonesia's re-integration into the United Nations in order to resume its effective role in strengthening the Organization and serving the cause of world peace.

55.    The twenty-first session convenes at a time when anxiety and tension prevail in various parts of the world due to the complexity of some grave problems which this international community has not as yet succeeded in solving.

56. The international community has been disappointed in its high hopes for the consolidation of peace and the elimination of tensions throughout the world; the war which is still raging in Viet-Nam threatens to expand to the entire region of South-East Asia; the problem of Palestine still awaits a just and final solution; the policy of racial discrimination, of apartheid, is still pursued in South Africa; many countries are still deeply engaged in the arms race and in devising weapons of mass destruction; some of the colonialist Powers still refuse to abide by the resolutions of this Organization on the liquidation of colonialism and on the granting of self-determination to peoples; and there are scores of other international problems.

57.    The problem of Viet-Nam arouses the anxiety of the entire world in view of the recent expansion and of the frightful escalation of the war. The circumstances of this problem have tied the hands of the United Nations and have prevented it from carrying out its mission of maintaining peace and security in that part of the world. The Libyan delegation, while expressing its appreciation for the sincere efforts made to solve the problem of Viet-Nam, deeply regrets that such efforts have not been successful.

58.    My delegation feels that this fact calls from us greater efforts to reach a peaceful and just settlement of this grave problem. We are still hopeful, however, that the spirit of wisdom and moderation will prevail over considerations of pride, of politics or of ideology, and that all the parties concerned will come to the negotiating table to put an end to this tragic war.

59.    We live in an age in which the interests of the world have become closely interlinked, where distances are no longer a hindrance to communications between nations, where the solidarity of the human family is becoming more and more of a necessity. In such an age — an age of space exploration — it is only natural that the role of the United Nations should be enhanced, and that its obligations should increase with the passage of time. All mankind is deeply and keenly interested in this Organization, and attaches great importance to the sacred mission it is called upon to fulfill. 

60. Speedy solutions must, therefore, he sought for those difficulties that nearly paralysed its function m the past, and which still threaten its effectiveness and its very existence. It is imperative that a sound financial system be established to enable the Organization to carry out its mission properly and to realize the high hopes placed in it. The Libyan delegation earnestly hopes that solutions will be reached of the problems of financing and administering peacekeeping operations, so that the maintenance of peace may be safeguarded and the possibility of future financial and constitutional crises averted.

61.    Libya is indeed a child of the United Nations, having been launched into statehood under its auspices and having matured in its fold. It has consistently pursued a policy of realism and moderation resting on non-alignment and on pursuing the friendship of all nations. We have always been motivated by a sincere desire to strengthen world peace, understanding, co-operation and mutual respect in accordance with the lofty objectives and principles of the Charter. At this critical juncture, when the international situation is deteriorating, when the spectre of war and devastation looms large, we feel more than ever the need to abide by the Charter, to be faithful to its ideals, and to apply wisdom, reason and self-restraint in order to eliminate the forces which are pushing the world into the abyss of destruction.

62.    The consolidation of world peace and the elimination of the causes of conflicts and animosity are two of the basic objectives of our Organization. The goal of mankind of a just and free world wherein human dignity is respected, will remain only an unattainable dream if we fail to achieve peaceful existence. Unless the oppressive nightmare of terror is removed, the grand designs for world prosperity and co-operation cannot become a reality.

63.    It was, therefore, with a sigh of relief that the world witnessed the signing, in 1963, by over a hundred nations, of the Treaty banning nuclear-weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water. We all hoped that the implementation of the General Assembly's recommendation  on the banning of underground nuclear tests would soon follow, thus making another significant step toward the greater goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control. Three years have now passed since that recommendation, but the world has witnessed only adamancy on all sides, unwillingness to meet half-way, and an increase in the number of nations possessing or seeking to possess nuclear weapons. We are aware of the fact that the matter is in the hands of the great Powers, that they alone can alleviate the fears of mankind. Therefore, it is our duty to continue to exert every moral pressure within the United Nations and outside the Organization until these great Powers become fully aware of their responsibilities for the future of the world and renounce those dreadful weapons.

64.    Libya is following with great interest the efforts made at Geneva to reach agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and a total ban on nuclear tests as an essential step towards general and complete disarmament. It is our hope that the General Assembly will spurt1 no effort to achieve agreement on banning underground tests and preventing the spread and proliferation of nuclear weapons. We also hope1 that the way will be cleared for a world disarmament conference to which all countries will be invited, in accordance with resolution 2031) (XX) which the General Assembly adopted during its last session. We earnestly hope that all endeavours in this connexion will be crowned with success so that the future of coming generations may be safeguarded and the enormous sums spent on armaments be diverted to securing a better life for all nations,

65.    The current negotiations among the great Powers to reach agreement on the peaceful uses of outer space will certainly help the efforts made in the field of disarmament. We earnestly hope that all difficulties may be overcome when this item comes up for discussion at the present session.

66.    The better world that the United Nations is striving to achieve cannot become a reality unless it rests on a solid foundation of justice. Injustices inflicted on some of the world's peoples must be removed and the sacred right to self-determination must be universally applied.

67.    No people are more eager for freedom and justice than the Arab people of Palestine, who have been the victims of an injustice unprecedented in modern history and who have been subjected to untold suffering since the formation of the United Nations. History has seen numerous wars and various forms of colonization, has seen many nations lose their freedom and independence, but never before has it witnessed an invader occupying a country and driving out its indigenous population within the hearing and sight of the United Nations, a world Organization with lofty principles. All of this came about, ic” no better reason than to set up a State for r multi-racial and multi-lingual group of people who are aliens to the land and whose only common bond is religion and the desire to establish a forged political entity in Arab Palestine which depends for its survival on fundraising, blackmail and acts of aggression. Unfortunately, the United Nations, in the early years of its existence and under deplorable circumstances known to all, played a role in this shocking tragedy. It has been faced with this problem for the last eighteen years on a routine basis but so far has failed to restore the rights of the Palestine refugees by securing their return to their homeland and compelling the aggressive Israel authorities to honour their obligations before this Organization.

68.    The Zionists have recently celebrated the eighteenth anniversary of their occupation of that Arab land assuming that such a period of time was sufficient to legalize their occupation. They could not, however, obscure the fact that the legitimate owners of the country were observing, on the same date, the eighteenth anniversary of their plight. If the Zionists and their supports feel that the passage of eighteen years may be cited as proof that their alleged State has achieved stability and that the bitterness of the past has been forgotten, they should be reminded that those eighteen years have only added to the determination of the Palestine refugees — and the new generation — to return to their homes, a fact that has been repeatedly confirmed in the reports of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

69.    It has been the practice of the General Assembly to discuss this question under the item of the Commissioner-General's report, but this discussion should not in fact be confined to the crust of bread provided to the refugees by the United Nations; it should extend to the root and essence of the issue, namely the rightful return of the Arabs to their homeland.

70.    All the attempts of Zionism and colonialism to resolve the question of the Arab refugees and to safeguard the existence of Israel have been doomed to failure. The Arab people of Palestine have formed a political entity which can speak for them and defend their rights. They are now from this rostrum urging the United Nations and the conscience of mankind to do them justice and redress the wrong inflicted upon them, first, by implementing the provisions of paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III), and then, by restoring their legitimate right to self-determination in accordance with the principles of the United Nations and its Charter.

71.    Another example of the irresponsibility of the Israel authorities, of their disregard for United Nations resolutions and their unceasing intrigues against the Arab people of Palestine, was the inauguration on 30 August 1966 of the Knesset building in Jerusalem, in violation of United Nations resolutions and recommendations regarding this holy city. This Israeli move is but another proof of Israel's persistence in its policy of aggression and its disrespect for this Organization and its resolutions.

72.    Parts of the African continent are still shackled and suffering under the yoke of a ruthless imperialism, and are now struggling heroically to realize their aspirations. The people of Angola, Mozambique, and so-called Portuguese Guinea are subjected to the worst forms of colonialism and oppression. The Government of Portugal is still pursuing its colonialist policy in these territories in complete disregard of the numerous United Nations resolutions endorsing the right of these peoples to self-determination. The United Nations must find the means to enable the peoples of these territories to exercise their rights in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV), and must compel the Government of Portugal to implement this and other resolutions and to respond to world opinion.

73.    In Rhodesia, an explosive situation is threatening the peace and security of the entire African continent, as a result of the persistence of the white minority Government. It has defied United Nations resolutions and violated the most fundamental human rights by establishing an illegal regime which denies the indigenous population its inalienable right freely to manage its own affairs.

74.    Although the United Nations has taken some measures to combat this dangerous situation, the delegation of the Kingdom of Libya considers that those measures are not adequate, We therefore request the General Assembly to redouble its efforts to put an end to this illegal situation in Rhodesia, and to restore to the people of that country its legitimate rights.

75.    The serious debates which have taken place in this hall on the question of South West Africa bear witness to the importance of this question and the necessity of finding a just solution for it.

76.    The persistence of the Government of South Africa in dominating that Territory and exploiting its resources, as well as in enslaving its population and refusing to accept any interference, has prompted the General Assembly to give priority to discussion of this important question.

77.    The Libyan delegation wishes to express its grave concern over the continuation by the Government of South Africa of its policy of segregation and racial discrimination and its denial to the African majority of the fundamental rights set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Deeply moved by this regrettable situation, Libya wishes to urge the General Assembly to induce the Government of South Africa to depart from its racial policies and grant freedom and equality to its indigenous population.

78.    The persistence of the Government of South Africa in defying United Nations resolutions, and in pursuing the policy of racial discrimination, constitutes in our view, a serious threat to peace and security in the African continent and a violation of the spirit of the Charter, which guarantees basic human rights.

79.    The Libyan delegation wishes to express its appreciation and thanks to the Committee of Twenty- four for its untiring efforts towards the elimination of colonialism, and to laud the resolution adopted by that Committee during its historic series of meetings held in some African capitals. It is our earnest hope that those decisions, which reflect the wishes and aspirations of colonized people for freedom and independence, will be applied, and that the spectre of colonialism will finally disappear from those territories, enabling their people to exercise their right to self-determination.

80.    Foremost among these are the struggling peoples of Aden and Southern Arabia, who have been deprived of stability and security in recent years. Libya wishes to declare its unqualified support for the struggle of its brethren in that part of the world, and its insistence that they should be enabled to exercise their right to self-determination, in accordance with United Nations decisions, and to benefit from United Nations technical and economic assistance.

81.    As for the question of Oman, the Libyan delegation hopes that the General Assembly will give due attention and consideration to the just cause of the people of Oman and take the necessary measures to enable that people to determine its own future in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV).

82.    World peace cannot be solidly established and international co-operation fully realized so long as the world is divided into "haves" and "have-nots", into wealthy nations enjoying all the luxuries of life, and impoverished nations on the point of starvation. The gap between these two groups of nations is still as wide as ever. The efforts of the United Nations to bridge this gap nave not yet been fully successful. The Development Decade, now past its mid-point, has not registered any substantial progress in the economic position of the developing countries. A world with an ever-growing population and relatively diminishing resources is threatened with a very serious danger unless tin* industrial countries render to the developing countries effective and realistic assistance designed to develop their economic, social and human resources, and thus achieve the solidarity of the human race in its search for a better life for all.

83.    The United Nations Trade and Development Conference has sought to lay down new principles and guidelines for the re-organization of the structure of commerce and world economy in the light of the exigencies of the modern world and recent developments. Two years have now elapsed since the Final Act was issued, but most of its recommendations have not yet been followed. Further efforts to implement them would undoubtedly help to solve many of the economic problems facing the developing countries.

84.    Another recent step taken by the United Nations to assist the economic and social development of developing countries has been the establishment of the United Nations Organization for Industrial Development. Libya, being itself a developing country, believes that industrialization is among the most important ways of ridding developing countries of the causes of underdevelopment, and of achieving speedy progress. We hope that during this session the necessary means will be provided to enable this new organization to perform its functions effectively.

85.    Permit me, before concluding my address, to salute from this rostrum the delegations of the States Members of the United Nations, and to express the willingness of the Libyan delegation to co-operate fully with them. The delegation of the Kingdom of Lybia also wishes to avail itself of this opportunity to express, on behalf of our King, our Government and our people, our best and sincere wishes for the progress and prosperity of all the peoples of the United Nations, to renew our wishes for the success of the General Assembly's present session, and to wish the United Nations every success in its endeavours to build a better world in which justice, peace and prosperity prevail.
