20.     An important result of the twentieth session of the General Assembly was the adoption of the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of their Independence and Sovereignty resolution 2131 (XX)], That Declaration, which had its origin in an initiative of the Soviet Union, has as its aim the removal of one of the main sources of aggravation of the international situation. It is gratifying to be able to state that this Declaration has been accorded warm approval by world public opinion.

21.    The Soviet Union and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, which, like other socialist countries, are guided by the interest of preserving and consolidating the peace and security of nations, have submitted for the consideration of the present session new proposals that seek to ensure the implementation of the Declaration and to develop further and elaborate the ideas contained in that important document. Accordingly, the Soviet delegation has proposed for consideration [see A/6397] an item entitled "Status of the implementation of the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of their Independence and Sovereignty" [item 96], and the Government of Czechoslovakia has proposed for inscription on the agenda [seeA/6393] an item entitled "Strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force in international relations, and of the right of peoples to self-determination" [item 92].

22.    The Mongolian delegation considers that those proposals fully meet the imperative demands arising from the dangerous international situation obtaining at present. Indeed, the world is today witnessing more and more incidents of violation by imperialist Powers of universally accepted norms of international law and the principles of the United Nations Charter. Peace-loving peoples are shocked by the gross interference of the imperialists in the internal affairs of other States, by the armed intervention boldly perpetrated against the freedom and independence of innocent peoples. The colonial war being waged by United States imperialists against the Viet-Namese people constitutes the most dangerous and impudent example of such criminal acts of blatant aggression.

23.    The United States, having flouted the Geneva Agreements of 1954, continues to escalate the destructive war in Viet-Nam and to whip up wanton aggression against a sovereign socialist State: the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. The United States aggressors are resorting to the most barbaric methods of war. They do not hesitate to employ, or flinch from employing, horribly deadly and disfiguring napalm bombs and poisonous chemicals in their orgy of mass murder. The bombing of suburbs of the towns of Hanoi and Haiphong, the resort to tactics of systematic destruction of dams and irrigation systems of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, in order to cause widespread floods and drought, make still more sinister the inhumanity and savage brutality of the United States warmongers.

24.    The Mongolian people have resolutely condemned the imperialist aggression of the United States in Viet-Nam. This aggression is indeed an act directed against the national liberation movements of the people of South-East Asia and constitutes a grave crime against peace and therefore against all humanity. The Mongolian people have firmly taken the side of the Viet-Namese people and have been rendering to them all possible assistance and support from the first day of their just and heroic struggle in defence of their fatherland and for peace and national independence. That struggle is truly not for themselves alone, for the cause to which they are dedicated is the right of peoples to solve their own problems by and for themselves, without outside interference.

25.    The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic, as has been indicated before, considers the well-known constructive proposals of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the National Liberation Front of South Viet-Nam as a good basis for a just settlement of the Viet-Namese problem. The United States should heed the demands of peoples the world over and should cease immediately its aggression against the Democratic _ Republic of Viet-Nam, should bring an end to the colonial war in South Viet-Nam, withdraw all its troops and the armed forces of its accomplices, and strictly observe the Geneva Agreements on Viet-Nam. Any moves that fail to meet these requirements will certainly be rejected by the Viet-Namese people, who are fighting for the integrity and freedom of their motherland against alien invaders.

26.    The United States attempt to create the impression that it is seeking a peaceful settlement of the Viet-Namese problem will in no way mislead world public opinion. The irresponsible statements by high- ranking spokesmen of the United States about "peace initiatives" and "peace talks", which are always followed by a new escalation of aggressive actions, amount to nothing but a hypocritical device aimed at concealing their true intentions. The pious pronouncements are also an attempt to evade the condemnation of peoples everywhere, including that of the American people. Take, for instance, the statement made at this session the other day by the representative of the United States, when he alleged that the United States Government was earnestly seeking a peaceful settlement in Viet-Nam. It was the Saigon regime itself which the next day exposed the falsity of this manoeuvre by admitting that the statement contained nothing new and was meant only for public opinion. Certainly no one can know better than the Saigon puppets what their overseas bosses mean when they speak up on Viet- Nam. While on the bank of the East River the United States representative dwells on the peace intentions of the United States, the implications of a "big war" and the Viet-Nam war allocations for the year 1968 — I repeat, 1968 — are earnestly discussed in the White House.

27.    In this context, it should be noted that the recent proposal by Thailand, the Philippines and Malaysia to convene a so-called conference of Asian countries on Viet-Nam is nothing but an old Washington trick- in Asian dress, so to speak. The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic has certainly rejected this so-called initiative, which seeks the same end as that contemplated in the United States statements about peace talks — that is, to divert world public opinion from new criminal steps in escalation of the war in Viet-Nam. And that is the case not only with regard to Viet-Nam.

28.    The facts show that the Viet-Nam war is part of a far-reaching plan of military and political adventure of the United States, directed against peace and against the freedom and independence of the peoples of South-East Asia and the Far East. The sovereign States of Laos and Cambodia have become objects of United States encroachments. Their territories are subjected to raids by the United States Air Force, These criminal acts of the United States imperialists constitute flagrant violations of the sovereignty and neutrality of Cambodia and Laos.

29.    In escalating the aggressive war in Viet-Nam, the United States is dragging its puppets and certain of its allies deeper into that infamous war, while it increases the number of its troops in South Viet-Nam. For those who take a realistic view of matters, it should be clear that the United States aggression in South-East Asia constitutes an increasing threat to universal peace and international security. Therefore, the States which are genuinely interested in relaxing international tension should resolutely demand of the United States that it immediately bring to a halt the criminal war in Viet-Nam, withdraw all its troops and armaments from South Viet-Nam, and strictly observe the Geneva Agreements on Indo-China.

30.    The Mongolian People's Republic cannot but be concerned at the active proliferation of the aggressive designs of the United States of America mother parts of the Asian continent. The knocking together of a new military bloc — the so-called Asian and Pacific Council (ASPAC) —in particular is yet another product of this rampant course of United States policy in the Far East. To conceal the aggressive nature of ASPAC, the United States and the participants in that bloc are trying to represent it as an organization for pure economic and cultural co-operation among countries of Asia and Oceania. In fact, the true aim of this "holy" alliance is to strengthen the military and political positions of the United States and the antinational reactionary regimes in the Far East and South-East Asia under the slogan of outspoken anticommunism. This military bloc, like the South-East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) and the Alliance of Australia, New Zealand and the United States (ANZUS), is meant to serve as a tool for the expansionist policy of the United States and is directed against the national liberation movements of Asian peoples. Some of the ASPAC members are openly rendering military assistance to the American imperialists by sending thousands of their troops to South Viet-Nam. Others abet them by offering their territories as a bridgehead or by supplying the American troops in Viet-Nam with war materials and other necessary equipment.

31.    We cannot overlook the fact that the military circles of Japan —whose actions are utterly at variance with the national interests of the Japanese people, who desire to live in peace and friendship with other nations — are playing an active part in that military bloc.

32.    The continued occupation by United States troops of South Korea is another fact which seriously endangers the international atmosphere in the Far East, The situation has been further aggravated by the fanatic participation of the Seoul regime in the United States colonial war in Viet-Nam. That regime, on orders from Washington, is engineering, together with other reactionary regimes, new plots against the peoples of Asia and the Far East. This all clearly demonstrates the intention of the United States to perpetuate the occupation of South Korea as a springboard and a device for its aggressive schemes in this part of the continent. It is a matter for strong condemnation that such actions, completely inconsistent with the aims and principles of the United Nations Charter, are being practised under the flag of this very Organization. The withdrawal of United States and other foreign troops stationed in South Korea is a basic condition for the settlement of the Korean problem. This point is dealt with in the memorandum of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of 21 July 1966 [see A/6370]; The constructive proposals contained in this memorandum fully reflect the genuine interests of the entire Korean people.

33.    Our delegation has co-sponsored the inscription on the agenda [see A/6394] of an item entitled "Withdrawal of all United States and other foreign forces occupying South Korea under the flag of the United Nations and dissolution of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea" [item 93] for consideration at the present session of the General Assembly. The adoption by this session of the General Assembly of a realistic and explicit decision on this question, in accordance with the interests and rights of the Korean people, would be an important contribution by the United Nations towards the solution of the Korean problem.

34.    The granting of independence to peoples still under the colonial yoke is an urgent problem which is closely linked with the question of preserving and consolidating world peace. My delegation has repeatedly stated from this rostrum the position of its Government on this question. The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic unconditionally supports the struggle of the colonial and dependent peoples for self-determination, and is committed actively and resolutely to expose the plots of imperialist Powers directed against the revolutionary process of emancipation and social progress of nations,

35.    The national liberation movement of peoples is expanding both in scope and magnitude and it affects ever more strongly the process of world developments. The peoples of Mozambique, Angola, so-called Portuguese Guinea, South Arabia and other colonial territories are continuing their courageous struggle against alien domination. This year three more new States, namely, Guyana, Botswana and Lesotho, have emerged. More and more young States of Asia and Africa are gaining increasing success in their efforts to eliminate the remnants of the colonial past and to develop an independent national economy so as to frustrate the neo-colonialist encroachments of imperialist forces.

36.    It should be noted, however, that, although the position of colonialism has been now completely and irrevocably weakened, the colonizers are still trying to hold on to what is left of this shameful system by resorting to force in the attempt to reverse the progressive pace of historic development. So it is that millions of people are still suffering under colonial oppression.

37.    The situation grows still graver with the merging of colonialism with racism, the most abominable phenomenon in human history. The racist regimes in the Republic of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia have developed into the worst type of colonialism. The imposition by the racist regimes of the policy of apartheid on South West Africa and some other colonial territories is fraught with the danger of converting the southern part of the African continent into a breeding ground of colonialism under a new but no less cruel guise. For these regimes constitute serviceable military and economic footholds for the imperialists from which to move against the national liberation forces of the African peoples.

38.    The United Nations, if it is to live up to its aims and principles, should take effective measures to implement the provisions of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and of the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.

39.    The Mongolian delegation is of the opinion that the Security Council should deal frequently with the problems of colonial territories, since the situations obtaining there often present a threat to the peace and security of one or another area of the world. The Mongolian delegation pronounces itself in favour of the suggestion put forward here that an early date should be fixed for the complete elimination of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.

40.    The imperialist Powers, with the United States at their head, in pursuance of neo-colonialistic designs, are intensifying their subversive activities against the independence and social progress of the young States of Asia, Africa and Latin America. They support anti-national and reactionary forces within and outside those countries and, in close co-operation with them, engineer plots and military coups d’etat, thus nullifying the progressive gains of the peoples.

41.    With this in view, the delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic would like to emphasize that military bases in foreign territories constitute one of the major obstacles to the strengthening of the independence of the newly emerged nations, and are permanent potential means for intervention in their internal affairs. The imperialist Powers very frequently use their military bases on foreign soil for armed suppression of the national liberation and revolutionary movements of peoples. One can readily cite numerous instances. For example, the military base at Guantanamo is being systematically used by the United States for aggression against the Republic of Cuba and the heroic Cuban people who, for the first time in the Western hemisphere, are successfully building a socialist society. The United States military bases installed on the islands of Oceania, as well as those stationed in Thailand and the Philippines, serve as bridgeheads for aggression against the peoples of Viet-Nam and the other countries of Asia. The presence of hundreds of United States military bases scattered over South- East Asia and Oceania, with more than a half million United States troops and large numbers of nuclear and other weapons, represents a direct threat to the security of the peoples in this part of the world. Besides, military bases of imperialist Powers exist to exert pressure on the States on whose territories they are installed. At present, when these bases are being increasingly equipped with rocket and nuclear weapons and when the use of these weapons in military adventures could easily lead not only to the unleashing of a world war but also to a total nuclear conflict, the question of the elimination of foreign military bases attains overriding importance.

42.    Peoples all over the world cannot but come forward with determination — as does the people of my country — in support of the elimination of foreign military bases and for the withdrawal of all foreign troops and arms from countries where they are stationed. In the opinion of my delegation, the current session would make a serious contribution to this end by adopting a positive decision on the question of the "Elimination of foreign military bases in the countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America", which has been inscribed on the agenda by the delegation of the Soviet Union [item 98]. In supporting this initiative of the Government of the Soviet Union, the delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic acts on the conviction that the use of the territories of other countries for establishing military bases, in defiance of the will of the peoples concerned, should be resolutely condemned as an act of infringement of their national independence and sovereignty, as a violation of the norms of international law and of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is our considered view that the positive solution of the question of the elimination of foreign military bases in African, Asian and Latin American countries is in full harmony with the vital interest of safeguarding their independence and sovereignty from neo-colonialist encroachments. It is the further view of my delegation that in a broader sense the elimination of foreign military bases undoubtedly would have great significance for the consolidation of peace and security, for this would constitute implementation of one of the important partial measures toward the achievement of general and complete disarmament,

43.    The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic, in accordance with its attitude in the past, considers the realization of general and complete disarmament to be an objective and urgent necessity and raises its voice in support of the convening of a world disarmament conference, with the participation of all States concerned,

44.    In the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, the Soviet Union, other socialist States and non-aligned countries, have exerted every effort over the past four years to bring about the adoption of concrete measures in the field of disarmament. However, owing to the negative attitude of the Committee's Western members, the four years' work of this Committee has not yielded any tangible results.

45.    The Mongolian delegation, as in the past, considers that general and complete disarmament should start with nuclear disarmament at the very outset. One of the important steps in this direction would be the conclusion of an international agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The main condition for the conclusion of such an agreement should be strict observance of the provision of General Assembly resolution 2028 (XX), to the effect that the treaty should be void of any loop-holes which might permit nuclear or non-nuclear Powers to proliferate, directly or indirectly, nuclear weapons in any form.

46.    The non-dissemination of nuclear weapons is recognized as one of the most imperative needs of today, because the increase in the number of countries possessing such weapons, and more especially access to them by the Bonn revenge-seekers — who are now actively engaged in preparation for equipping their armed forces with rocket and nuclear weapons — could lead to tragic consequences for humanity. With these considerations in mind, the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries are bending their efforts to reaching the solution of the non-proliferation problem, and they continue to search for ways and means that would facilitate agreement on this matter. The initiative of the Government of the Soviet Union, which has submitted to the twenty-first session of the General Assembly an item entitled "Renunciation by States of actions hampering the conclusion of an agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons" [agenda item 97] is yet another fresh manifestation of this earnest desire of the socialist countries. In the view of my delegation, the value of this proposal lies in the possibility of creating an international climate in which, until the agreement on non-proliferation is reached, steps would not be taken which might lead, directly or indirectly, to the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

47.    The question of non-dissemination of nuclear weapons is closely linked with that of the creation of zones free of such weapons, and with the question of the complete prohibition of nuclear tests. With regard to the question of the prohibition of underground tests, my delegation holds the view that, at the present stage of the progress of science and technology, national means of detection are abundantly sufficient to control the implementation of an agreement on the prohibition of underground nuclear tests. Indeed, everyday experience amply proves the validity of such an opinion.

48.    In pressing for so-called on-site inspection, the United States and its followers are prompted by considerations which not only hamper the solution of this question, but also give room for mistrust between States.

49.    The question of nuclear-free zones, as we see it, is of particular importance to Europe, in view of the tension introduced by the aggressive courses taken by the military and political alliance of the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany. In the opinion of my delegation, the proposals submitted by the Polish People's Republic and the German Democratic Republic on this matter have prepared a favourable ground for fruitful discussion and the consequent adoption of a positive decision on this problem, which is of such vital importance for the peoples of Europe.

50.    We are certainly not going to assert that with the creation of a nuclear-free zone in Europe the whole problem relevant to the consolidation of the security of peoples of that continent would be solved. The dangerous development of events in Europe, brought about by the revenge-seeking policy of the military circles of the Federal Republic of Germany, makes the problem of ensuring collective security in Europe an especially pressing issue. In this connexion, the Government of the Mongolian People's Republic attaches special importance to the Bucharest Declaration. In adopting this Declaration, member States of the Warsaw Pact came forward with a new constructive programme on normalization of the situation and the strengthening of peace and security in that part of the world.

51.    It would not be an exaggeration to say that the crux of the question of ensuring European security lies in the peaceful settlement of the problem of Germany, The Mongolian People's Republic, like other socialist countries, considers that the peaceful settlement of the problem of Germany should be based on the inviolability of the existing borders in Europe, on the exclusion of any possible means of access for the military and revanchist forces of Western Germany to nuclear weapons, and on the unconditional recognition of the fact of the existence of two sovereign States on German soil — the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany,

52.    A peace-loving German State, the German Democratic Republic, is playing an important part in the cause of safeguarding peace and security in Europe. The foreign policy of the German Democratic Republic is focused on the creation of an atmosphere of confidence and co-operation among European countries and at preventing the outbreak of a new war from German soil. The GermanDemocratio Republic comes out with constructive proposals aimed at the normalization of relations between all European States, including the Federal Republic of Germany. The Government of the German Democratic Republic maintains extensive international ties. Its policies are firmly based on the norms of international law and the principles of the United Nations Charter, These facts testify that the German Democratic Republic fully complies with all the requirements set forth in the United Nations Charter for its membership. The request of the German Democratic Republic for admission to the United Nations itself eloquently attests that it is a true advocate of peace and international co-operation. My delegation, on the instructions of its Government, declares that the request of the German Democratic Republic should be satisfied in full,

53.    It has always been the view of the Government of the Mongolian People's Republic that the development of broad international co-operation in economic, commercial, cultural and other fields, based on equality and mutual benefit, constitutes the prime condition for the strengthening of mutual understanding and confidence among States and peoples, and for the elimination of the increasing gap between the developed and developing nations in their economic progress. It is very often said here that the economic disparity between the developed and developing nations serves as the main source of the instability of the world situation. It is true in respect of the discriminative and selfish policy pursued by certain Western Powers in their international economic and trade relations, a policy whose aim is to dominate the lesser developed countries. With respect to the socialist States and the newly emerged countries, they are not seeking unilateral gains at the cost of others, but are striving to see to it that these relations are based on the principles of equality and mutual benefits for all the parties involved and on regard for the interests of the economically backward countries and peoples in their efforts for accelerated development. While most of the nations are engaged in the search for normalization of their economic relations, certain imperialist Powers, striving to perpetuate obsolete practices in international economic relations, hamper in every way the realization of the principles endorsed by the first United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held at Geneva in 1964.

54.    The United Nations should take decisive steps to abolish the abnormal conditions still existing in international economic life —conditions which are alien to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter — and should bring about measures for the implementation of its previous major decisions adopted in the economic and social fields.

55.    The complicated world situation of today requires most Imperatively an increase in the role of the United Nations and of its effectiveness as an instrument called upon to secure world peace. This Organization can deal successfully with the tasks facing it only through the strict observance of its Charter, which has embodied the major principles of international relations.

56.    My delegation notes with regret that the principles of the United Nations Charter, including that of the universality of this Organization, have frequently been violated by certain Member States in their selfish interests. The fact that the United Nations has for years put up with the flagrant discrimination against the People's Republic of China is a situation which is no longer tolerable. The Mongolian delegation considers that the legitimate rights of the People's Republic of China should be restored immediately. The representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek clique must be expelled from all organs of the Organization.

57.    In our opinion, the principle of universality should also be applied to the question of admitting observers to the United Nations. Unfortunately, here again we witness a half-way policy, and even cases of direct discrimination, wherein the United States has a hand by abusing the advantage of being the host country to the United Nations Headquarters.

58.    My delegation wishes to emphasize here that concerted and positive actions by the newly independent States, which now constitute a sizable majority in the United Nations, would contribute to a great extent to the increasing of the effectiveness of this world body as an instrument of peace and international co-operation.

59.    The delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic, guided by the principles of the peace-loving foreign policy of its Government, declares itself willing to support every measure and decision that has for its aim the ensuring of world peace and international security, and the developing of friendly relations among nations, in compliance with the United Nations Charter. My delegation will do its utmost to promote the success of the work of the present session.

60.    In conclusion, we should like to associate ourselves with those who have highly commended the activities of our Secretary-General, U Thant. We too want to express the hope that the Secretary-General will accede to the request of many Governments and agree to serve for another term.