125.     Mr. President, on behalf of Sierra Leone, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you once again on your election to the high office of the Presidency of the General Assembly and to restate the confidence of the Government and people of Sierra Leone that you will conduct the work of the twenty-first session of the General Assembly with the highest competence, so that this session will be remembered as one of the greatest in United Nations history.

126.    We meet, regrettably, in an atmosphere of world tension and continuing crises. In times like these, the role of the United Nations assumes added importance as an indispensable instrument for world peace. For twenty years, this Organization has played a valuable role in keeping the peace. Yet, as the problems of our times become more aggravating, the need for strengthening this Organization as an instrument of peace becomes greater. In that context my delegation wishes to express our great concern that the distinguished Secretary-General, U Thant, has declared his intention not to make himself available for a further period of office after this session. We believe that our Organization, at this critical period of its existence, needs the incomparable services of U Thant. The Secretary-General has raised questions of great moment pertaining to the conditions under which any Secretary-General of this Organization will be obliged to function. It is important that the points he has raised be given serious consideration, particularly by those nations more directly concerned with the maintenance of world peace. It will not be enough to reaffirm a general anxiety to have U Thant continue in his post; it is also necessary, in the view of my delegation, that those problems which he has outlined be seriously considered with a view to eliminating them, so as to ensure that the role of the Secretary-General becomes more meaningful as a mediating influence in the preservation of peace.

127.    The main objective of this Organization has always been the maintenance of world peace. To that end, this Organization has approved many objectives. One of these objectives has been the solution to the disarmament problem. Even though everyone is aware of the dangers attending the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the continuation of the arms race, yet, unfortunately, during the past year not much progress has been made in that field. My delegation hopes that everyone concerned will redouble his efforts to help find solutions to those grave problems and thereby lessen the risk of international conflict.

128.    International peace can hardly be maintained in a world in which some men are free and others are under the yoke of colonialism. It is because of the full awareness of that problem and imbued by the idealism which brought this Organization into being — an idealism which connotes complete faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, and in the equal rights of men and women and of all nations, large and small — that this Organization has solemnly resolved to remove the last vestiges of colonialism from the world. This line of thinking at the United Nations achieved full stature in 1960, when the well-known resolution 1514 (XV) incorporating the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was adopted. Since then, the Special Committee of Twenty-four has persevered with efforts to speed up the process of decolonization. My country has the honour of serving in that Committee and we are proud to have been able to make some contribution to its work. During the past year, led by our permanent representative, who is its Chairman, the Special Committee embarked for the second time on an extensive tour of the African capitals. Lamentably, it is in Africa that we still find the last bastions of defiant colonialism. This involvement of the United Nations with the problems of colonialism, with particular reference to Africa, has done much to dramatize the interest of the Organization in finding solutions of a practical nature to the international problems of our times.

129.    Chief of those problems vexing the international community today is that of Southern Rhodesia. My Prime Minister, Sir Albert Margai, and the Government and people of Sierra Leone, have been greatly troubled by the continued existence of the illegal Smith regime in Rhodesia, in flagrant contempt of world opinion, and by the failure of the United Kingdom Government to honour its commitment to the 4 million Africans of Southern Rhodesia, whose liberty has been mortgaged to a racist minority. In the recent London Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference [ended on 14 September 1966], my Prime Minister had occasion to set out clearly the views of our Government on that question. We continue to hold the view that force should be used to remove Ian Smith's regime. In the long eventful history of British imperialism, many have been the occasions when the British have resorted to the use of force to achieve their objectives. It is unfortunate and rather strange but perhaps understandable in the case of Rhodesia, where the fate of 4 million indigenous Africans is at stake, that the British should now be so reluctant and indeed unwilling to resort to the use of force. We are further of the view that mandatory sanctions under Articles 41 and 42 of Chapter VII of the Charter should be used and we note with satisfaction that the United Kingdom is now committed to come to the United Nations and join in the request for the implementation of mandatory sanctions if Mr. Smith does not yield ground by the end of the year. On this question of Rhodesia, we firmly believe that the only principle applicable for the determination of the will of the people of that country is the principle of democracy conceived in terms of majority rule, that is, "one man, one vote". That is why my delegation is happy that the United Kingdom Government is now becoming fully aware of the importance of the implementation of that principle of majority rule before and not after independence is granted to Southern Rhodesia.

130.    With the Smith regime in Rhodesia and the recalcitrant apartheid regime in South Africa, the Portuguese have formed an unholy alliance to hold back the course of history and to perpetuate the doctrine of race superiority in the southern part of Africa. In spite of many resolutions of the United Nations and the outrage of the international Community, the Portuguese continue to wage a war of genocide and attrition on the helpless victims of their oppressive rule in Angola, Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea. During the Special Committee's recent visit to Africa, many petitioners from those Territories gave evidence of the atrocities being pernetrated by the Portuguese in Africa. My Government, together with other Member States of the Organization of African Unity, is committed to give every assistance to the struggling fighters for freedom in those Territories, so that real independence will speedily be achieved. To my Government, together with those of Liberia, Tunisia and Madagascar, has been assigned, by the Organization of African Unity, the special responsibility of pursuing this matter of the Portuguese Territories as well as that of the apartheid policy in South Africa, before the Security Council of the United Nations, We of Africa are still convinced that international problems can be solved by peaceful means and we still have great faith in the value of the United Nations as an instrument for the realization of peace. We hope that we shall receive the support of all the Members of this Organization, particularly the support of the permanent members of the Security Council, without whose help and active co-operation this Organization would not be able to fulfil its responsibility to remove this threat to international peace which the Portuguese are now presenting by their continued defiance of United Nations resolutions and their continued denial of the right of self-determination and independence.

131.    Mr. President, closely allied with the Portuguese policy in Africa is that of the notorious apartheid policy of South Africa. For years the racists of South Africa have ignored resolutions of the United Nations and defied world opinion. We note with dismay that, in spite of the many resolutions of this Organization and the earnest and loud condemnations of Member States, apartheid in South Africa continues to thrive. Thanks to the reluctance of some nations, particularly those which are in a position to adopt policies that would affect the economic situation in South Africa, the racists have consolidated their position and extended their tentacles to engulf the hapless people of South West Africa. In its resolution 2054 A (XX) the General Assembly last year reiterated its request for an arms embargo and appealed as a matter of urgency for the cessation of economic collaboration with South Africa. Unfortunately, support for the arms embargo is still not unanimous and the economic boycott is far from effective because the major trading partners of South Africa continue to trade with it, thus supporting its racist regime. It is not enough for Member States to pay lip service to fundamental principles and for them to assume moralistic postures while indulging in evasive manoeuvres. It is important that action son this question should be in keeping with words.

132.    We have stated on many occasions, not only in this Assembly but also in the Security Council, that the situation in South Africa created by the policy of apartheid constitutes a serious threat to the peace and security not only of Africa, but of the world, and that a peaceful solution can be brought about only by the implementation of economic sanctions as envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter. The alternative is dark and foreboding and grows more dangerous as we temporize.

133.    The problem of colonialism is unfortunately not confined to the African continent. Six years after this Assembly adopted resolution 1514 (XV), calling for a speedy end to colonialism, we find colonialism still existing in many parts of the world.

134. In spite of United Nations resolutions, the problem of Aden is still with us. We believe that the Administering Authority should implement without further delay the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and particularly those of the Special Committee of Twenty-four, In that regard, we fully endorse the recent resolution of that Committee [A/6300/Rev.1, chap. VI, para. 382], which called for a United Nations presence in Aden to assist in bringing into effect real independence. We note with satisfaction the somewhat qualified acceptance by the United Kingdom Government of the terms of that resolution. We therefore hope that the Secretary-General will not 'be impeded in his efforts to appoint a mission to Aden, in keeping with the terms of this resolution, in consultation with the Special Committee and the Administering Authority.

135.    There are many small Territories still under the colonial yoke which ought to be granted independence. It is a matter for regret that progress in those Territories towards independence continues to be slow. We hope every Member of this Assembly will give the necessary co-operation and help towards the creation of a suitable atmosphere of world opinion which will compel the colonial Powers to realize that the days of colonialism are over and that in the middle of the twentieth century colonialism is a policy which is inimical to the interests of world peace and good international relations.

136.    The question of peace-keeping has for some time now been one of the unfinished items on our agenda. We recall the difficulties involving Article 19 of the United Nations Charter, which nearly paralysed the working of this Organization two years ago. The need for the existence of peace-keeping machinery cannot be overstated. It is important, in the view of my delegation, that all countries concerned should seriously consider the question of voluntary contributions to defray the outstanding deficit in the finances of the United Nations. In that connexion, I should like to refer to the work of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, in which my country is represented. We have already stated our views on this matter in that Committee. Unfortunately, however, it appears that comparatively little progress has been achieved in the work of the Committee. We are, however, hopeful that when this question comes before the Assembly this year a more genuine effort will be made to arrive at a universally acceptable solution, We also hope that the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations will continue its good work and that its efforts will not be hampered by political or partisan considerations.

137.    My country has noted with great admiration the efforts of the space powers to land a man on the moon and the remarkable scientific achievements so far made in this field. We are hopeful that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space will continue its efforts to have these scientific achievements used for peaceful purposes, for the universal benefit of mankind. My delegation whole-heartedly welcomes the international conference on the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space, proposed for 1967 [see resolution 2130 (XX)]. We believe that conferences like these can go a long way towards making relevant to the whole world the achievements of the great Powers in outer space.

138.    Beclouding our deliberations at this session is the existence of armed conflict in South-East Asia with all its threat of escalation into a major war. Let us remember that by subscribing to the Charter of this great Organization all Member States, great and small, have pledged themselves to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that peace and security and justice are not endangered. We urge that due attention be paid to this principle in the settlement of the existing conflict in South-East Asia. The death and devastation in Viet-Nam and the indescribable suffering imposed on helpless women and children must come to an end or the conflagration will spread, with frightening consequences for all. We therefore urge all those involved in that conflict to exert themselves to the utmost to seek an early and peaceful solution.

139.    In the view of my delegation, there should be increasing communication between all nations, large and small. For the stabilization of world peace we believe it to be of the utmost importance that communication at all levels should increase amongst the great Powers — that is to say, the space Powers and the nuclear Powers. The need for peace has never been greater than it is today, because our capacity for self-destruction has never been greater. However, it is meaningless to talk of peace unless efforts are made to limit the spread of nuclear weapons and to arrive at general and complete disarmament. The presence of nuclear weapons should impress on us all the inescapable truth that there is no alternative to peace. While believing that the United Nations is the best instrument available to man for realizing and preserving the peace, we also believe that in order to be able to discharge this sacred duty effectively the Organization should assume a more universal character. We believe that this Organization will not be fully representative of the aspirations of mankind, nor will it achieve full effectiveness as an instrument of peace, unless and until the most populous country on earth takes its rightful place amongst us and joins us in the compelling task of seeking and preserving peace. We wish to emphasize the inequity and lack of realism which keeps almost one quarter of the earth's population from being represented in the greatest international Organization of our time. With this conviction, my delegation will therefore again support the admission of the People's Republic of China to the United Nations and all its organs.

140.    It is a sad commentary on our times that the gap between the rich and the poor nations, instead of narrowing, continues to grow wider. There can be no lasting peace so long as such a situation is allowed to continue. The United Nations showed a full awareness of these economic and development problems when, two years ago, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was set up as an organ of the General Assembly, following the 1964 Geneva Conference. That was obviously a step in the right direction. Subsequently, General Assembly resolution 2029 (XX) established the United Nations Development Programme, which combined the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance with the Special Fun. In that connexion, it is useful to note that the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme has emphasized that additional economic assistance is necessary and that its own financial resources for 1967 should be substantially increased to meet its commitments in developing countries. Greater assistance is needed to cope with the ever-increasing problems of the developing countries. Without question, the developing countries have been exerting themselves to the utmost to increase their productivity and diversify their economies, and have been displaying a growing determination to accelerate their economic growth through a more comprehensive harnessing of their internal resources. The economic interdependence of States, however, requires the full co-operation and assistance of the developed nations if our goals are to be realized. The internal resources of the developing countries cannot be sufficiently productive unless there is a complementary flow of external resources.

141.    The minimum target set for the United Nations Development Decade is for a flow of capital of 1 per cent of the net individual national incomes of developed countries into developing countries. Even this target has not been reached and, indeed, the rate of flow is declining. This is particularly evident in the increasing burden of debt-servicing commitments which developing countries have to bear. By tying aid to specific projects which are not always of a high priority in the development plans of the recipient nation; by tying loans and aid to the purchase of capital goods at sometimes uncompetitive prices from donor countries, without a corresponding undertaking to purchase goods in repayment from the receiving country, and by sometimes imposing high interest rates, the net value of external aid is reduced to the point where the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development has assessed that the inflow will be completely offset in a little more than fifteen years.

142.    It is in an effort to stem this ebbing tide that the Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session urged the developed countries to make external resources available to developing countries on easier terms and conditions [see resolution 1183 (XLI)]. The following ways were suggested: (a) by increasing aid on a long term and continuing basis and by making easier the methods of obtaining and utilizing such aid; (b) by providing, not later than 1968, at least 80 per cent of their aid as grants and loans at 3 per cent interest or less to be repaid in twenty-five years or more; (c) by paying greater attention to the development plans and programmes of developing countries and noting the need to maintain . and expand existing facilities instead of introducing' new and unrelated projects; (d) by untying loans as regards sources of supply and, where loans are tied to the supply of goods and services, to supply them at competitive prices; (e) by reinvesting loan repayments in the debtor countries in addition to the inflow of external aid; (f) by accepting repayments in the form of‘manufactured and agricultural goods and by providing additional foreign exchange resources to developing countries in order to ease their debt servicing burden.

143.    We are confident that if these measures were adopted and scrupulously applied, they would make a remarkable contribution to the economic development of the world as a whole. We fully endorse these recommendations. At the same time, we realize that, in order to ensure their effective implementation and, to co-ordinate fully the international effort to promote economic development, suitable machinery will be needed.

144.    We therefore warmly welcome the forthcoming establishment of a United Nations Organization for Industrial Development as an organ of the General Assembly and we hope that when the organization is established all Members of this Assembly will give it unqualified support.

145.    The United Nations Development Decade is fast approaching its end. Whether it will achieve its goals will depend on the dedication and endeavour of all nations great and small. In the world of today, all nations — benefactors and beneficiaries alike — have a vested interest in accelerated world development and in the creation of a world system free from want and misery of every kind, the kind of world envisaged in the noble aims of our Charter.
