1.     Mr. President, it is my pleasant duty to extend to you, on behalf of the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic, our congratulations on your election to preside over the General Assembly at its twenty-first session. Your election to this high office is an expression of the great esteem that all representatives have for your personal qualities and for your country.

2.    As an Asian State, we are especially gratified at the election of a man of your calibre, who is most ably suited to discharge the obligations of this renowned office. Please accept the sincerest congratulations of the people of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wish you well in your illustrious office and bear for the brother people of Afghanistan much good will and lasting friendship.

3.    We are also happy about the return of Indonesia to the United Nations, and warmly welcome Guyana, Botswana and Lesotho in our midst. Thus the domain of freedom is expanding and the rule of colonialism receding. And we are confident that the Organization will greatly benefit from the contributions of these newly admitted Members; they bring us a precious experience and a resonant voice, to mingle with the experience and voices of lands, such as mine, that have tasted the bitterness of foreign rule and would strive to make the Organization reflect the hopes and problems of a new world.

4.    The Organization cannot achieve universality nor truly reflect the realities of international society when the representatives of one quarter of the people of this earth are denied the right to sit amongst us and participate in finding solutions for the crises that beset the world. The United States is totally responsible for preventing the People's Republic of China from occupying its rightful place among us. The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic, which has taken the initiative, along with a number of other Aslan and African delegations, in requesting a discussion of this question, expresses the hope that the United States will at long last discontinue its opposition to the seating of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations.

5.    It is high time that the United States Government realized that its persistent attempts to ignore China on the international scene have, among other things, led it to its present predicament in South-East Asia. The tragedy of the war in Viet-Nam is but one of the consequences of this aggressive policy which is costing the American people the loss of thousands of their youths and billions of dollars.

6.    The fact that the people of Viet-Nam, small in number, have been able to withstand the onslaught against them should represent something meaningful to all large and small countries, and more especially to those of us who belong to the emerging nations in the world. We say so because we think that, had the people of Viet-Nam not believed so profoundly in the justice of their cause and the legitimacy of their fight, and had they not known that the majority of the peoples of the world support their struggle and stand by them, they would not have been able to withstand so valiantly the aggression directed against them.

7.    No words are more adequate to illustrate the dangers that threaten our countries and the despair that will settle over the masses of our peoples should this aggressive war continue than the words uttered by our Secretary-General when he announced that he would not offer himself for another term to this eminent post, after he had tried all methods and exhausted all diplomatic means of persuasion.

8.    We are convinced that the situation will become even more dangerous, unless the United States is prepared to recognize the right of the people of Viet-Nam to self-determination without any outside interference, It has been proved beyond a shadow of doubt that there can be no other solution to the war than by stopping the bombing of North Viet-Nam, withdrawing United States troops from Viet-Namese soil, recognizing the Viet-Cong as the representative of the people of South Viet-Nam, and returning to the Geneva Agreements.

9.    In fact there is no difference between the American contention that the United States has the right to remain in Viet-Nam in order to protect it against alleged communist dangers, and the contention of the colonialist Powers, under the pretext of a civilizing mission, that they have a right to remain in the territories they still occupy.

10.    Pretexts are always being used to justify subjugation of the peoples of Asia and Africa. Is not Southern Rhodesian neo-colonialism a case in point? What else is the justification for the presence of a minority in Rhodesia which subjects the country to its will try force of arms while preventing the overwhelming majority of the population from exercising their right to independence and freedom? In addition to all this, the racist white regime in Rhodesia has declared unilaterally its independence, in defiance of world public opinion, moral and human values and the principles of international law.

11.    In this connexion, how does Israel differ from the regime established in Southern Rhodesia? Here, too, a foreign minority, brought to Palestine from the four corners of the earth, has been afforded the means — in complicity with the colonialist Powers — to impose its will on the inhabitants of the country. As a result of this colonialist venture, a whole people has been dispossessed and expelled from its homeland.

12.    The pretext to justify this unparalleled aggression has been that the Jews lived in Palestine some two thousand years ago. Were we to accept this fallacy, the map of the world would be completely changed. Indeed, the continued presence of Portuguese colonialism in Africa is nothing but a manifestation of colonial rule based on sheer brute force. This lamentable state of affairs continues in defiance of the Declaration of independence adopted by the General Assembly at its fifteenth session calling for the liquidation of colonialism everywhere in the world. A Special Committee was then established whose mandate was to implement the resolution. Syria feels honoured to be a member of this Special Committee, which we think has achieved a notable record and contributed greatly to the cause of liberty in the world.

13.    Colonialism, cunning as it is, offers false pretexts to justify Its unwillingness to abide by the resolution and grant freedom to its colonies, thus depriving the colonial peoples of the enjoyment of their lawful right to independence and emancipation.

14.    What is happening today in Aden, Oman and Southern Arabia, where brave freedom-fighters are massacred simply because they claim their Inalienable rights, is in fact an example of colonialist tyranny, which no United Nations resolutions, code of human rights, or considerations of justice or morality restrains. The embittered struggle for Independence in the southern part of the Arabian Peninsula bears witness to British colonialism, which has delayed Its awaited departure from the area and has thus far violated United Nations resolutions calling for the ending of colonialism there. The establishment of new British military bases in Muscat and other sheikhdoms on the Arabian Gulf proves beyond doubt that the British Government is flouting the resolutions of our Organization. This colonialist obstinacy only strengthens our demand that British troops be evacuated immediately from the region. There is no reason why the people of the area should continue to be deprived of decent life and liberty, and the colonial propaganda attempting to convey to the outside world that the colonialist presence is the forerunner of progress does not deceive anybody In this enlightened age.

15.    Emerging nations are threatened today by various types of colonial and neo-colonial forms of economic penetration, where advantage is taken of the need of the developing countries, which have recently achieved independence, to secure assistance or technical help. It is through these channels that neo-colonialism attempts to re-establish its position of power and control.

16.    While we express these views on imperialism and colonialism and the various means which they employ to gain control in the developing countries, we find that the Zionist occupation of Palestine constitutes one of the highest peaks attained by both colonialism and imperialism. On the one hand, Zionism employs all the methods of old colonialism through occupation of a land, expulsion of its people and confiscation of its property, while on the other hand Israel plays the role of benevolent provider, when it is in fact an imperialist tool, commissioned by imperialist countries to grant loans and extend assistance in their name.

17.    The conspiracy of Israel with the imperialist countries is not limited to economic matters. It has been proved beyond doubt that Israel has co-operated with colonialist Powers and interests In many of the countries struggling to achieve independence. The records of the United Nations abound in instances in which the delegation of Israel has taken a negative stand on the struggle of African countries for emancipation.

18.    To these instances we can add recent proof of this persistent attitude on the part of Israel. News coming directly from Israel indicated that General Moshe Dayan, former Israel Chief of Staff, went to South Viet-Nam to assist its Government in its aggressive war against the Army of National Liberation, the FNL, He went there disguised as a war correspondent In order to conceal the real nature of his assignment. It has also been proved beyond doubt that Israel has supplied the Portuguese army in Angola with armaments of Israeli manufacture. This fact came to light when the People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola [MPLA] issued a press release in Dar es Salaam on 6 May last, which I quote:

"The Angolan people, fighting against colonial domination and for independence, are going on to an Inevitable victory. However, this struggle is made difficult by the Imperialist countries and their agents who give enormous assistance to the fascist government of Portugal.

"On 24 March 1966 a detachment of guerrillas of the MPLA, acting in the Angolan region of Cabinda, destroyed a unit of the Portuguese colonial army and captured a lot of war material. Among the material captured were several submachine guns UZ3, made in Israel.

"This fact proves that Israel is furnishing War material to the Portuguese colonialists for the extermination of the Angolan people fighting for their Independence, In the same way that the imperialist Governments co-operate with Portugal In NATO, Israel is giving military assistance to the colonialists and thus contributes to the protraction of the
colonial regime in Angola and the slavery of the African people.

"The MPLA denounces this and strongly protests against this co-operation between Israel and the Portuguese colonialists."

19.    The Syrian Arab Republic stands squarely on the side of the African majority in Southern Rhodesia against the minority Government, upholds the right to independence of the peoples of Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea and other similar areas, condemns the Zionist occupation of Palestine, strongly maintaining the right of the refugees to return to their usurped land, and condemns the policy of apartheid practised in South Africa. Syria takes these positions because it firmly believes that freedom is indivisible. And we also believe that foreign occupation, wherever it may be in the world, constitutes a serious threat, not only against the still subjugated peoples of the world, but against all nations which have gained their independence in the wake of a long and bloody struggle.

20.    It is for these reasons, and because we believe in the oneness of the human struggle to achieve freedom and honor, that we declare from this rostrum our unconditional support for all national liberation movements in the world. We do so because we are of the conviction that no measure of human progress can be attained under the yoke of foreign rule. We also think that the continued denial to some of the peoples of the world of their legitimate right to self-determination is in itself contrary to all moral principles, and fraught with grave dangers which will inevitably jeopardize the peace of the world.

21.    We therefore reiterate the absolute necessity of co-operation amongst all peace-loving peoples to put an end to the abuses that men inflict upon their fellow- men. We also insist that the Declaration of independence be implemented in the shortest possible time.

22.    Should the resolutions that we adopt here remain unimplemented, and should colonial Governments continue to use their power to defy the will of the majority of human society with impunity, we can be sure that complacency on our part will drive the subjugated peoples of the world to seek other, more forceful, bloodier means of attaining their independence. No one can, for example, direct any blame to the people in the occupied Arab South for resorting to arms in order to achieve independence and freedom.

23.    British colonialism has delayed for too long its departure, and the London Government has advanced too many excuses to deceive anyone. The people of Rhodesia will be within their legitimate rights if they rise to overthrow the minority Government there, whatever the results may be. It is precisely for these reasons that those Governments which value the meaning of freedom and support the struggle of national liberation should extend their assistance to the struggling freedom fighters who are bent upon regaining their rights, whether in Oman, Rhodesia, Angola, Aden or in any other place in the world. The winds of liberty are blowing everywhere, and they will sweep whatever stands in their way. The sun set long ago and forever on the era in which one people could subjugate another.

24.    In this respect, the attitude of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has been to support the resolutions concerning the question of Kashmir which aim at providing the people of Kashmir with an opportunity to exercise their right of self-determination.

25.    Foremost among the advantages of having a general debate every year during the opening of an Assembly session is the opportunity it affords to Member delegations to review the various crises in the world and assess improvements or deterioration since the last session. It also provides us with a moment to discover what our Organization has achieved in the area of maintaining peace and security in the world and of protecting the peoples of the world from the ravages of war. We can also ascertain the degree to which resolutions on human rights and equality among the nations of the world have been implemented, whether these nations be large or small. We may also consider whether suitable conditions have been created to establish justice in the world and an atmosphere of co-operation among all peoples on the path of progress in the economic, cultural and social fields.

26.    In the light of what has happened during the last year, one may point to the great achievements that have been made in the efforts to reach the moon and to explore outer space, about which we know so little, and to the impressive number of other achievements in the field of science. However, the joy with which humanity has received the news of those great conquests over the forces of nature has not been devoid of disappointment at some of the negative aspects of the present world situation. The aggressive war in Viet-Nam has escalated sharply, and the number of United States troops has been increased. This, of course, has led to an increase in casualties on both sides, and has carried with it the inherent danger of a bigger war.

27.    The United States is spending huge amounts of money on the prosecution of its war in Viet-Nam, An American source stated several months ago that the Viet-Nam war is costing the American treasury about $33 million a day, and this figure is likely to increase.

28.    This huge military expenditure indicates to us, on the one hand, how little the imperialist Powers care about people's lives and, on the other, how they squander their money for aggression, even if it deprives their own people of vitally needed social progress. The war in Viet-Nam is costing the American people at present $1,250 million a month, a fact which has forced the United States Government to curtail its expenditures on a number of projects deemed beneficial to the American people.

29.    The sums we have Just quoted are but a small fraction of the total sum spent by the rich nations on armaments. One estimate has put the total sum spent last year at $200,000 million and this was found to equal the national incomes of all the developing countries.

30.    How then can there be co-operation and understanding among the rich and the poor nations when the poor nations are literally forced to deprive their own peoples of basic necessities in order to secure the needed foreign exchange to finance some of their development projects? Most often they are unsuccessful in securing this needed foreign exchange, while the United States spends $1,250 million a month to finance the war in Viet-Nam.

31.    A close look at the conditions of the developing nations shows that they suffer not only from deterioration in their terms of trade, lack of capital, administrative and technical skills, but also, in many regions of the world, from sudden declines in agricultural production, owing to causes outside their control. This forces them to divert part of their foreign exchange from the importation of capital goods to the purchase of needed food supplies. Consequently, the task of accelerating their own development in order to bridge the widening gap between them and the rich nations becomes more difficult.

32.    All the nations of the world, developed and developing, are in dire need of the vast sums which are being spent so generously and so foolishly on armaments. That makes it the paramount duty of the General Assembly to implement its resolution of last year which calls for the convocation of a world conference on disarmament [resolution 2030 (XX)] which would not only include Members of the United Nations, but which would also include, as a basic condition required for its seriousness and success, the presence of the Government of the People's Republic of China. Any attempt directed at discussing total and complete disarmament will prove to be futile and time-wasting unless the Government of the People's Republic of China is invited to take part in it in a manner commensurate with its international position and its human and military capabilities.

33.    We feel duty bound to call the attention of the Member States to occurrences in the Middle East entailing international repercussions and exposing the peace of that area to real danger.

34.    As a matter of actual fact, the unrest and disturbances to which the Middle East has been exposed for eighteen years has been entirely due to the carving out of a part of the Arab homeland in Palestine, to be presented as a free gift by the Western nations — headed by Britain and the United States of America — for the creation of what today is called Israel. Strangers brought from various parts of the world occupy the place of the Arab people of Palestine, who have been expelled from their homeland in the ugliest and most brutal manner ever resorted to in the twentieth century. In truth, occupation by Jews from foreign countries of the place of a people settled in its homeland, and the setting up of a usurping authority on the lands of this exiled people is an occurrence without parallel in contemporary history. This was coupled with the most shameful implications of domination and colonialism, using the instruments of destruction, oppression and expulsion.

35.    The element invading Palestine was not content with occupation, with the help of colonialist countries and the protection of their soldiers, but went on to drive out most of the inhabitants, confiscate their possessions, and deal with the remaining Arab minority in a way comparable to the regimes of racist discrimination in South Africa and Rhodesia in all its rigour and brutality.

36.    Ever since the Zionist occupation of Palestine eighteen years ago, the Israel authorities, in complicity with and having the full support and financial and military co-operation of the colonialist Powers, have persisted in engendering crisis after crisis, and in creating tension by committing one act of aggression after another against the Arab countries along the demarcation lines.

37.    Here one may be able to form an idea of the extreme tension created in the area subsequent to the forceful injection of this alien presence in the Arab world. Suffice it to mention that one fifth of all Security Council meetings has been devoted to the discussion of aggressions on the part of Israel against Arab countries, and that various pertinent United Nations organs and the Mixed Armistice Commissions have received over 4,000 complaints Involving aggressive acts committed by Israel. All this is happening while the rightful people of occupied Palestine continue to live under tents, exposed to the ravages of hunger and disease, deprived of property and homeland and of opportunity to avail themselves of the right of self-determination, freedom and independence, available to all the peoples of the world.

38.    The expelled people of Palestine are scattered all over the four countries bordering their homeland. These are Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the UnitedArab Republic. The total number of the Palestinian victims of Israel aggression exceeds one and a half million. Although the United Nations established the United Nations Relief and Works Agency [UNRWA] over seventeen years ago to attend to the needs of the refugees, to feed them and care for their health and education, one is astonished to learn of the meagre budget available to this organization. Yet every year we are informed that one country or another plans to reduce its contribution to the budget of UNRWA.

39.    The threats to reduce contributions are but another means of pressure used to liquidate one of the last rights remaining to this oppressed people, and are further proof of the degree of dissipation of the principles of justice in colonialist countries — which so often lecture us in the floweriest terms of the virtues of freedom and democracy, while the sufferings of entire nations and peoples, such as Palestine and other occupied and subjugated areas in Africa and Asia, sit but lightly on their conscience.

40.    Imagine that what is allocated to feed the Palestinian refugees does not exceed $1.21 per person per month. This sadly surprising sum is about to be reduced even further, and half the refugees now do not get even that sum; while children of the refugees, who were born after the tragedy, are not even entitled to receive the benefits of this measly figure.

41.    But the Arab people of Palestine are neither poor nor helpless. When they were forced out of their homeland by the terrorist Zionist gangs, supported by international colonialism, they left behind properties worth $2,000 million, with a yearly income estimated, according to experts, at $173 million. If we add to that the accumulated interest of this sum for the last eighteen years, we find that the people of Palestine do not need either American or any other kind of assistance, for they do not wish to live as recipients of international charity.

42.    The Palestine Arab expellees have requested that they be granted the income accruing to them from their properties, which totals yearly five times the present expenditure of UNRWA, When the Arab States requested that the United Nations appoint an international custodian for these properties, who would supervise the collection of the income with the assistance of international civil servants, so that it might be disbursed for the benefit of the refugees, the United States was amongst the first countries to oppose this proposal. Had such a custodian been appointed, the United States and other countries would have been spared the necessity of making a contribution to the UNRWA budget.

43.    American support for Israel is not confined to this area alone. Rather, the United States takes it upon itself to supply Israel with all the means of committing aggression and inflicting destruction. Israel has received from the United States this year over 200 M-48 Patton tanks, and 90 F-104 jet planes and a number of Hawk missiles of the type used in the United States Army and the armies of its allies in NATO.

44.    I wish to assure the representatives here that Israel is in no financial position to pay the cost of these weapons of aggression. They should also not be surprised to learn that these armaments have been supplied to the authorities of Palestine at a nominal cost; so nominal that the American Secretary of Defense did not disclose the price of these armaments when he was testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Divulging the fantastically low price would have no doubt uncovered the scandal and conspiracy involved.

45.    What is the Inevitable purpose of Israel's possession of this military potential, in addition to the enormous amounts of war materials in its arsenal? It is aggression. In the period that has elapsed since the last session of the General Assembly, Israel has committed two very dangerous aggressions on the Truce demarcation lines which separate the Syrian Arab Republic from the Israel occupied area of Palestine. The first was committed on 14 July 1966, when several squadrons of Israel bombers and fighters attacked and bombed an engineering development project located on one of the tributaries of the River Jordan inside Syrian territory, killing and wounding innocent civilians. The second was when its armed gunboats fired at Syrian positions on the shores of Lake Tiberias on 15 August 1966, an action which necessitated counter action by Syrian forces as a measure of self-defence.

46.    While unveiling these details of Israel's aggression before the Assembly, we wish to announce from this international rostrum that the establishment of Israel In the heart of the Arab homeland is intended to divide the Arab world in Asia from the Arab world in Africa, and to use it as a front-line colonial base in this area of the world, where a voluminous amount of armaments and ammunition can be assembled and placed at the disposal of the imperialist Powers, who will use it to prevent the unification of the Arab world and hinder its progress and development.

47.    The Syrian Arab Republic, along with all the other Arab countries, is constantly directing attention to the inherent dangers emanating from the creation of Israel as a colonial outpost in the Middle East. We do so because we are convinced that world public opinion is gradually realizing the factual objectives for which it was created. The clever concealment of these facts behind the curtain of the tragedies that befell the Jewish people was intended only to camouflage the real plans of the founders of this usurper State and those of the countries which assisted in the fulfilment of these plans. We shall not allow any opportunity to slip by without directing the attention of the whole world to the potential dangers that may engulf the area should this travesty be permitted to continue.

48.    When we speak of the dangers which Israel poses to the peace, it is because these dangers do not threaten the Middle East alone, but they are likely to spread to other regions of the world. The basic philosophy which was at the foundation of the establishment of Israel is in actual point of fact a racist, aggressive and expansionist philosophy. The slogans and doctrines laid down, assembled and disseminated in books written and published by an earlier generation of Zionists are to be found in Israel today without discontinuity in the expressions and speeches and party platforms of their leaders. All these doctrines preach expansion, aggression, and the usurpation of additional Arab territories, extending from the Nile to the Euphrates.

49.    The Arab States today do not merely confront the 2 million Zionists who live in Israel, but, rather, they confront an organized world-wide 
Zionist movement entrenched in an overwhelming number of Western States, especially in the United States, where it is supported by the most influential political and governmental leaders. In addition to this, colonial countries have made their support of Israel against the Arab States a cardinal principle in the pursuit of their internal and external policies. This is what draws the lines of the confrontation between us and Zionism, and throws light on the immensity of the obstacles in the way of the achievement of unity and development by the Arab States.

50.    The majority of the countries which belong to the emerging nations in the world are heavily handicapped by burdens of poor conditions left behind by colonialism, which during its occupation of our lands pursued the one selfish objective of imposing its authority, draining our natural resources, and restraining by all means at their disposal our efforts to develop and progress. The colonialists embarked on this course out. of fear that our development and progress would pose a threat to their controls and interests in our domains. And when movements of national liberation were organized with the admitted purpose of overthrowing foreign rule in the respective countries and forcing it to relinquish its control and depart forever, they were confronted by obstacles of enormous magnitude. But the courage displayed by the colonized peoples and the support that the peoples gave to these movements of national liberation overcame all the shortcomings and enabled them gradually to go forward and conquer whatever Impediments stood in the way.

51.    In the Middle East, however, the problems that faced the Arab States were more complicated and infinitely more difficult, for in their struggle to rid themselves of colonialism, they found themselves, on the eve of independence, to be facing the same obstacles which had confronted all developing countries, in addition to the heavy and very bloody burdens which colonialism left behind when it created the alien State of Israel.

52.    The Arab countries were plagued and confronted by a disease in their midst which, fortunately, other countries which had emerged from the darkness of colonialism and into the bright light of liberty did not have to face. This unique situation confronts the Arab States which, though they share no responsibility for creating it, have had none the less to devote a great portion of their very limited material potential to strengthening their defences so as to be able to defend their sovereignty from the aggressive and expansionist Zionist dangers threatening the area.

53.    The diversion of a large percentage of our national income to the area of defence has deprived our people, who are the source of this income, from the benefits that would have accrued to them had we been able to spend it on much needed development projects. While these great burdens beset our people, we note that Israel continues to receive billions of dollars and unlimited quantities and varieties of arms and ammunition from Western sources at a nominal price.

54.    Despite everything, our people have a yearning for progress. We are in an era which features scientific planning and the development of natural resources. We in the Syrian Arab Republic have chosen for ourselves the road of socialism because we are convinced that it provides the best solution to the contradictions that beset our society and other peoples of the world in the economic and social fields. We believe that the road we have chosen is the best suited for eliminating class differences in our social system. It also enables us to restore to the people the ownership of all public utilities and means of production, the income of which is utilized for the best interest of our people.

55.    Perhaps one of the most outstanding features of economic independence practised by the Syrian Arab Republic is its decision to exploit its oil reserves by itself without assistance from any foreign interests. This would place Syria in the forefront of developing countries which have excluded foreign influence over their oil and have left it. under the complete control of the Government and the people. This has been accomplished despite the not-inconsiderable obstacles that had been placed in the way of achieving this goal.

56.    Our sincere belief in co-operation is as great as our belief that civilization pertains to all mankind. But we admit, at the same time, that some nations co-operate with us more than others do in extending unconditional aid and assistance. Our relations with the socialist camp and the emerging nations in the world are at their best. But this does not mean that we are not ready to co-operate with other States, only provided that such co-operation be based on the respect of our sovereignty and non-interference in our affairs.

57.    Considering the existence of various political systems and different governmental set-ups, we believe that this Organization is the best place for the dissemination and exchange of thoughts and ideas. The Syrian Arab Republic declares its full support for our Organization and also calls for its support and strengthening by all nations. It calls at the same time for it to be made universal and granted the ability to provide technical as well as economic assistance to small countries. The Syrian Arab Republic declares that it is in the interest of small nations, who constitute more than three-quarters of this Organization, to stand by the authority of the United Nations to maintain peace and prevent aggression.

58.    It is here that the hopes of the struggling peoples meet, and from, here they expect assistance to bring about their complete independence by fully emancipating them from their old colonizers and helping them along the lines of progress and self-sufficiency.

59.    Finally, I should like to conclude my statement by conveying the thanks of the Syrian delegation to U Thant for the services he has rendered to the cause of peace. We sincerely hope that the situation in the world and the conditions in this Organization will be such as to enable him to continue, as Secretary-General, his valuable work which has always been appreciated by all of us.