
27.     It gives me great pleasure to congratulate you, Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the Yemen Arab Republic and its Government on your election to the Presidency of the General Assembly at its twenty-first session. This is evidence of the confidence that this international Organization has placed in you, and the appreciation and respect that you enjoy from all; it is also an indication of the significant position that your country has among the nations of the world.

28.    The spiritual bonds, whose roots extend far deeper into the history of our two countries, and the strong ties of friendship and brotherhood between our two peoples, which go back many centuries, make me and my country, as well as the whole continent of Asia, very proud of your Presidency of this session. I am fully confident that the twenty-first session, under your Presidency, will yield fruitful results that will bring prosperity and peace to the whole world. At the same time, I cannot fail to praise the efforts that Mr. Amintore Fanfani deployed for the success of the twentieth session of this Assembly.

29.    It is a source of great pleasure for us to see the membership of this Organization increasing year after year, particularly when we see that some countries have been freed from the yoke of slavery and colonialism.

30.    We believe in the right of peoples to freedom and self-determination. We also believe in the universality of the United Nations. We therefore bid welcome to Guyana, Lesotho and Botswana to this Organization. We also welcome the independence of Barbados, and hail the return of Indonesia to this international Organization. At the same time, it is to our regret and concern that we do not see the People's Republic of China taking its proper and legitimate seat amongst us.

31.    This session convenes at a time when an atmosphere of international tension and anxiety prevails. The international problems that face our world today require us to face them with patience, wisdom and goodwill, because some of these problems have reached such limits that they are heavy burdens on the world conscience and threaten humanity with imminent annihilation. Despite the clarity of the Charter of the United Nations, which laid down the rules and principles that regulate relations between members of the international community, there are still some countries which use force as a means of achieving their goals and completely disregard those principles.

32.    We note with great concern that some of the countries principally responsible in this Organization for the preservation of peace according to the United Nations Charter are those who use force instead of following the path of peace. The savage war taking place in Viet-Nam, and the escalating military operations there, are acts of aggression against the security, integrity and independence of Viet-Nam and are a violation of its freedom.

33.    We demand the cessation of the air raids and military operations being carried out against the people of Viet-Nam and the evacuation of foreign troops from its soil, so that the Viet-Namese people, who have suffered the pangs of war for so long throughout these years may determine their own destiny and build their own future. The efforts exerted for the continuation of the military operations in Viet-Nam might be of greater benefit for world peace and for the prosperity of the Viet-Namese people if they were instead being exerted towards finding a peaceful solution to the problem and the creation of a suitable atmosphere to honour and implement the 1954 Geneva Agreements.

34.    To grant freedom and independence to the people that are still groaning under the yoke of colonialist rule is the only way of achieving permanent peace and developing co-operation among the international community. The use of force against peoples struggling for their independence is also one of the main sources of disturbances of international peace and security.

35.    In speaking of the use of force, we find a contradiction in the actions of these countries. Britain, for instance, refused to use force against the illegal regime of Ian Smith, whereas she exercises intimidation and suppression to silence the voices of the nationalists who demand freedom and independence in the occupied south of Yemen. We also find that since the beginning of the revolution of the Yemeni people, who rose to destroy imperialism and reaction, Britain has been working for the destruction of the revolution of the Yemeni people — because Britain is aware that the success of the Yemeni revolution is a supporting factor for the independence of the Occupied South of Yemen and a menace to her colonial interests and her influence in the whole Arab region.

36.    Britain has persisted in using all kinds of pressure and terror, as well as other inhuman means that violate every principle of the United Nations Charter in order to destroy the Yemeni revolution. The annals of the United Nations, as all Members know, are filled with records of British aggression against the frontiers of the Yemen Arab Republic. During the period 23 May-30 September 1966 alone, more than nine acts of aggression occurred in which all kinds of modern and destructive weapons were used against the peace-loving people of Yemen.

37.    Among other methods of pressure which Britain uses against the Yemen Arab Republic is the closing of the so-called borders between the south and the north of Yemen, thinking that by so doing it would isolate the people of the south from those in the north, as well as weaken the Yemeni economy.

38.    Britain, which every day repeats hymns of peace and freedom, and respect for the human rights and principles of the United Nations Charter, is the same Britain that is opening wide the doors of prisons to receive the freedom fighters of the occupied south of Yemen, whose only sin is their demand that their rights as human beings to express their own wishes, their own will and their just demands for freedom, independence and self-determination by respected.

39.    The military rule practised by Britain in the occupied south of Yemen and the denial to the people of liberty to express their own wishes, together with the use of savage methods against civilians and freedom fighters, including the exile of some of them, have become Britain's daily routine for the liquidation of the liberation movement in the region.

40.    Britain, as always, has the habit of manoeuvring in order to deceive world opinion as far as the independence of the occupied south of Yemen is concerned. Her objective is to maintain her influence in the area, to safeguard her military and economic interests in the whole region. Despite the clarity of the various resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the occupied south of Yemen, Britain still deceives world opinion by offering her own homemade interpretation in such a way as to suit her own interests. In my delegation's view, the British interpretations are contrary to the spirit and objectives of the pertinent General Assembly resolutions.

41.    While Britain has already declared its acceptance of the two resolutions, 1949 (XVIII) and 2023 (XX), passed by the General Assembly in 1963 and 1965, she has made certain reservations to her acceptance which make it clear that she has, in fact, refused to implement these Assembly resolutions.

42.    The only possible interpretation of the reservation with respect to the security of the region is that Britain refuses to grant freedom, to abolish martial law, to cease military operations and to release all prisoners and detainees. On the other hand, Britain's claim that she has no power to impose constitutional changes and her insistence on maintaining illegal agreements is very clear testimony that she refuses to hold general elections on the basis of direct universal suffrage according to the provisions of United Nations resolutions, Britain also refuses to liquidate the present federal institutions which in the resolutions, were considered not truly representative of the people. We are therefore happy to note that the Special Committee on decolonization rejected these reservations.

43.    The only solution to the problem of the occupied south of Yemen is the unconditional acceptance of the United Nations resolutions by Britain and their immediate implementation. Peace will not prevail unless the British colonial forces evacuate the area. Whether in the occupied south of Yemen, the Truciallmamates or Oman, British presence is the actual source of tension and instability.

44.    Speaking of peace, I should like to emphasize that peace will never be secured in the Middle East while a million Palestinian refugees live in tents in the desert, deprived of their own homeland, possessions and human rights. How can we ask this people to be patient when they are within arm's reach of their usurped home, Palestine? We still place great hope in the ability of this international Organization to put an end to the Zionist acts of conspiracy and aggression against the Arab people.

45.    The arms race and the danger of a nuclear war give rise to great anxiety among the peoples of the whole world. This is not only a danger to world peace and security, but also a threat to world civilization, as well as an impediment to international co-operation. The Yemen Arab Republic, therefore, fully supports the efforts deployed for reaching an agreement on complete disarmament under effective international control.

46.    The ever-increasing disrepancies in the standard of living between the developed and the developing nations are, in our belief, another source of tension in the world. The insistence of the countries which have the experience and own the capital to impose unfair political and economic conditions upon developing countries, as well as the monopoly and control of international trade, impedes the economic development of the developing countries and increases the affluence of the wealthy and the poverty of the poor. We hope, therefore, that the basis of the economic and commercial relations among nations will be reconsidered with a view to achieving international cooperation on the basis of justice and mutual benefit. The principles on which international economic relations between developed and developing countries rest do not suit the needs of our era.

47.    The Yemeni people, who suffered for almost 1,000 years from individualistic and despotic rule, were isolated from civilization and were deprived of all human rights, of free and decent life throughout those years, succeeded at last, at dawn on 26 September 1962, in throwing off that individualistic, despotic and backward rule and in shattering the fetters of hunger, ignorance, disease and isolation. After 1,000 years of isolation, the Yemeni people have been able, once again, to see the light of civilization and decent life. The Yemeni people, who revolted four years ago against injustice and backwardness, are determined to pursue a policy of reconstruction and development in order to catch up with the world of today.

48.    I do not need to burden the members of the Assembly with a detailed account of the situation in Yemen before the revolution. It is indicative to state, in this respect, that there were only three schools throughout the country, and that nothing was taught in these schools except religion, history of the various Imams and how to give allegiance to them, Yemen knew nothing of the modern means of transportation throughout its history; it has never had even one single paved road. The Yemen Arab Republic, in order to catch up with the rest of the peoples of the world in uprooting the germs of backwardness, is exerting maximum efforts to build schools, hospitals, roads and public services for the first time. We are embarking on productive projects that will bring prosperity, welfare and happiness to the people of Yemen.

49.    Medical care in the Yemen Arab Republic has, for the first time, become a sacred right of the people, whereas previously it was the exclusive right of the royal family. Due to the fact that new roads have been built and modern means of transportation have been employed, distances between neighbouring cities that were covered in weeks are now, for the first time, covered in a few hours.

50.    In the economic field, everything was owned by the Imam. The Yemeni people knew nothing more than paying taxes and zakat, without knowing how these funds were spent. We are doing our best to reorganize the Yemeni economy, to pursue modern methods of planning and budgetary procedures adopted by the modern, civilized world. Various projects, which will bring prosperity and well-being to the people, have become the main objective of my Government.

51.    In the political field, the Yemeni people were forbidden to think, deal with, or even discuss, political issues. The Imam ruled as a god on earth. The people had no right to know anything about the political affairs of their country. During the rule of the Imam, a mere mention of terms such as freedom, rights and constitution was considered a crime meriting capital punishment or life imprisonment. The revolution destroyed the myth of the "divine right". The rule of the people, by the people and for the people became the law of the Yemen Arab Republic.

52.    The Yemen Arab Republic believes very strongly in Arab unity and has reaffirmed in its Constitution the belief that it is an integral part of the Arab nation. The Yemen Arab Republic, in exercising its foreign policy, emphasizes the following.

53.    Firstly, the consolidation of its political, economic, cultural and other relations with its greater sister, the United Arab Republic, and the other sister Arab countries. The relationship between the Yemen Arab Republic and the United Arab Republic is based on common heritage, namely; language, religion, origin, customs and traditions, as well as unity of principles, unity of objectives and unity of destiny. The Yemeni people work with full force to achieve complete unity with the United Arab Republic as a first step towards a total Arab unity which is cherished by the millions in the Arab world. Within this framework, the co-operation existing between the Yemen Arab Republic and the United Arab Republic is a co-operation between one people. The revolutionary people of Yemen will never forget the sacrifices of the people of the United Arab Republic for the Yemen revolutionary gains.

54.    Secondly, the Yemen Arab Republic pursues the line of Arab solidarity within the framework of the Arab League.

55.    Thirdly, we believe in providing material and moral support for the struggle of the people of the occupied south of Yemen for their legitimate right to freedom, independence and self-determination.

56.    Fourthly, the Yemen Arab Republic supports the struggle of the Arab people of Oman, the Trucial Imamates of the Arabian Gulf and the Arab people of Palestine to achieve freedom and independence.

57.    So far as concerns international relations, the policy of Yemen is based on upholding the policy of non-alignment, adhering to the principles of the United Nations Charter and supporting the efforts of this great Organization to establish peace and security in the world and to strengthen its efforts for the economic development of under-developed countries.

58.    May I be allowed to express the gratitude of my Government for the valuable economic assistance which the United Nations has extended to Yemen. The Yemen Arab Republic endeavours to further political, economic and cultural relations with all countries, particularly the friendly countries which extended assistance to the people of Yemen in achieving the programme for the revolutionary development of the Yemeni community. The Yemen Arab Republic, in her endeavour to build her economy, accepts any economic and technical assistance, free from any conditions which might jeopardize her sovereignty and independence.

59.    The Yemen Arab Republic, which believes in the right of people to self-determination and freedom for all, will always struggle against colonialism and apartheid.

60.    The Yemen Arab Republic supports very strongly the peoples of Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea, Southern Rhodesia and South West Africa, as well as those regions which are still under Spanish colonialism, in their struggle to achieve freedom and independence. We condemn the racist regimes in South Africa, Southern Rhodesia and South West Africa.

61.    The Yemen Arab Republic emphasizes its desire for peace. Preservation of international peace and security has become the sacred demand of the developing nations, so that they might devote their efforts to developing their own countries, safeguarding their gains, and taking their rightful place in the world of the twentieth century, so as to contribute to world peace, civilization and humanity.

62.    In conclusion, I should like to repeat the appeal of my Government to U Thant, the Secretary-General, to renew his term as Secretary-General, so that he can make the hopes of millions come true, especially at a time when his wisdom, sincerity, efficiency and devotion to world peace and security are very much needed.