138.	Before using this opportunity to make a statement on behalf of the Government of Afghanistan, I must say that the intervention of the Afghan delegation in the general debate is not merely for the purpose of following a practice which is almost customary on this occasion.
139.	We represent a small nation which is confronted with great problems of its own, and which is concerned with all international problems. The fulfilment of our aspirations and the solution of our problems depend not only on our own efforts but on international peace and co-operation. Therefore, we find it more essential than anybody else to voice our views in the United Nations, an Organization dedicated to the cause of peace and co-operation among nations. We shall not take the time of the General Assembly except to make a few general remarks about the international problems before the Assembly and to acquaint our colleagues with the principles that govern our policy and the spirit with which we shall approach these problems at a time when we find ourselves most concerned about the prevailing tension in different parts of the world.
140.	Having considered the agenda of this session, and having in mind the prevailing world situation, we know that the present session is one of the most important sessions in the history of the United Nations, not only because we are confronted with problems of great importance and significance, but also because of the undeniable fact that most of these problems are in their most important stage.
141.	It is essential that special consideration be given to the standing problems which have appeared repeatedly on the agenda of the General Assembly. We may face recent difficulties with a sense of consolation, and we may cherish a hope that these problems will be solved when they are dealt With by the United Nations. But in regard to problems which we have not been able to solve for many years, we should admit that we will not be in a position to seek excuses or cherish much hope if they are not approached in a more realistic and constructive manner at this session of the General Assembly. It cannot be denied that the solution of these long-standing problems would prevent new situations from arising and would pave the way for better understanding and more constructive international co-operation in areas where such co-operation has hitherto been hampered by the existing political differences.
142.	While we say this, we must add that due to the circumstances prevailing in different parts of the world, we cannot slur over the fact that the lack of a better understanding at this session might nullify the efforts made by the United Nations at previous sessions in connexion with certain problems, efforts which in certain cases could even have been considered constructive achievements.
143.	To give expression to our concerns, we are compelled to say that the situation in the Middle East, despite the efforts made at the emergency special session of the General Assembly, is still a source of anxiety and perplexity which cannot be ignored by the General Assembly. We are looking forward to a note of encouragement in the report of the Secretary-General, but we do not think that the resolution [1237 (ES-III)] adopted at the emergency special session is adequate to deal with the real causes of anxiety and tension in this area. The serious problems of this most important part of the world cannot be met successfully unless further effective measures are considered by the United Nations with the co-operation of the Arab States. My delegation stated its views on this issue at the emergency special session. The spirit of understanding demonstrated by the Arab States during that session was a source of great encouragement, not only to my delegation, which had expressed the wish that our friends in the Middle East would demonstrate such a spirit, but also to all Members of the United Nations and to people all over the world.
144.	The development of events in Algeria is most discouraging. The analysis of this situation, from our point of view confronts us with two disappointing facts. The first fact is that there is war in Algeria. The second fact is that the General Assembly resolution, adopted without any opposition, has not been implemented so as at least to create a basis for hope of a peaceful solution of this problem.
145.	It is a matter of regret if an unopposed resolution of the General Assembly does not receive the consideration of Member States. The results are more alarming than ever before.
146.	We sincerely hope that the parties concerned will realize even at this late hour the grave consequences involved in a careless consideration of this problem, which is already an issue of a "hot" war between two peoples who have every chance of being close friends, being bound by bonds which can be considered lasting ties between nations, in an age which is "the age of the fulfilment of the aspirations of peoples and the end of Rule by Force".
147.	We cannot think of any people who would be more capable of understanding the Algerian problem than the great people of France, with whom we have always had most friendly relations, a state of affairs which we have always kept in mind in the consideration of all matters, including the question of Algeria, and which we should always like to preserve.
148.	While the questions of Cyprus and West Irian remain unresolved, we are receiving alarming news from the Far East. It was a source of encouragement, however, when agreement was reached on holding the ambassadorial talks which have begun in Warsaw. We do hope that a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan problem will result from these direct negotiations. Whatever the outcome may be, the spirit and the quick decision of the parties concerned to negotiate should be appreciated. We hope that the same spirit will come to the assistance of the parties directly concerned with the problems of West Irian and Cyprus.
149. We still note that the stubborn and unjust policies of certain Powers continue in the face of the struggle of millions of people for their natural and legitimate right to independence and their exercise of the right of self-determination. In cherishing these aspirations, these people are no longer alone, as these are the common aspirations of all freedom-loving people and of all those who realize that the peace and security of the world cannot be achieved unless the fundamental right to national Independence is recognized for all peoples and nations.
150.	These common aspirations have been expressed repeatedly by the people of Asia and Africa and have been supported by the majority of the peace-loving nations of the world Inside and outside the United Nations. We wish to state that the Afghan delegation will follow its traditional policy of support of these peoples and will dedicate all its efforts to the cause of the self-determination of all peoples and nations.
151.	We note that the use of force is still in process. Actions and measures destroying stability and disturbing the balance of power in different areas are persistently prevailing and are being initiated in a careless manner. These are' all matters which should receive the serious consideration of the General Assembly.
152.	The important question of economic, social and cultural development of the less advanced areas of the world is one which should receive the consideration it fully deserves. Millions of people in the world are engaged in the difficult task of improving the economic, social and cultural conditions which, in most cases, were imposed upon them by unjust politics and unpleasant events of the past. Afghanistan is one these countries. Therefore we perhaps are in a position to realize more than anyone else the sufferings of these people, for we have learned much from the bitter experiences of the state of war during the last two centuries, which most happily resulted in the preservation of our independence but most unhappily imposed upon us the present economic and social conditions. While we wish to express our real appreciation of United Nations co-operation in this area, we would urge the Assembly to take more effective measures in this direction.
153.	Among the unfortunate factors which have hindered the achievement of satisfactory results in this field is the regrettable competition among nations in the arms race and the lack of confidence which has been standing in the way of disarmament and, consequently, in the way of the advancement of human progress and the maintenance of peace and security.
154. The obstacles preventing the peaceful uses of new energies for the purpose of achieving a better life for the people of the world are an Integral part of this great impediment to the fulfilment of the common aspirations of man.
155.	No small nation can make a greater contribution than to give expression to its concern on the question of disarmament, as it is a matter which cannot be solved except by the good intentions and the realization of the responsibilities of the big Powers. Nevertheless, it remains a source of great anxiety for all peoples everywhere. We hope that no effort will be spared to achieve satisfactory progress in this field and that this matter will be examined with concern for the welfare of humanity only and without regard to political differences and considerations of strategic positions.
156.	We believe that an agreement on principles on this issue would contribute greatly to peace and stability in the world and, by lessening international tension, would pave the way for further steps which could be taken in the direction of peace and prosperity,
157.	We should share the anxiety of all the people of the world concerning the destructive harm, known and unknown, resulting from radiation caused by nuclear tests, harm which can effect the health and happiness of mankind. In the light of scientific reports, we would find it almost impossible to understand why all nations would not immediately try to reach an agreement on this question. Since the achievement of these goals depends solely on the establishment of understanding and mutual confidence, the necessity of paying urgent consideration to ways and means of making it possible for nations to live in peace is obvious. Basing our views on the important consideration of the Interrelationship of all these matters, we shall support any measures which will create more amicable relationships out of which peace and prosperity could grow.
158.	References have been made recently to the possible creation of a United Nations peace force. My Government, having the utmost confidence in this Organization and hoping that the United Nations becomes increasingly effective as an Instrument of peace, believes that this idea requires most careful study, particularly in the prevailing international atmosphere. We feel that we should be most careful in our deliberations on this issue, because any hasty or half-considered measures in this field would involve dangers that might affect the Organization directly.
159.	While we are not prepared to go into the details of this matter at the present stage, we find it essential to mention that in any case the United Nations should deal with it only at the proper time and after thorough examination of the desirability of establishing such a force. The way for a thorough consideration of this matter can be paved only by greater efforts to be undertaken by the United Nations through the Secretary-General.
160.	We believe, in view of all these serious problems which confront the world, that there is only one place to seek a betterment of the conditions, and that place is the United Nations. It is not for one delegation to decide how great the responsibility of the United Nations is, and we should like to see that fact realized by all of us.
161.	It is our understanding that we are here with a spirit and a determination to practise tolerance, to make it possible for nations to live together in peace with one another as good neighbours and to unite their desire and their strength to ensure human brotherhood. Our purposes are set out in the Charter to which we all adhere.
162.	Our gatherings in the past, as we believe, have been useful and effective substitutions for war. Our presence here expresses our willingness to discuss, to negotiate and to compromise with each other. Our duty is to make this greatest international democracy of all time a working reality, for the purpose of securing universal justice and equality. Our prestige and success depend on our respect for fundamental human rights, the dignity of the individual, and that of peoples and of nations. This understanding will be the basis of any policy that the Afghan delegation adopts during this session of the General Assembly; Our Interest in the discussions of international affairs will not be limited to those things which affect us directly.
163.	While we do not believe that, when discussing the relations between peoples and nations, geographical distances deserve sole consideration and while we realize that these distances are mere fictions carried over from earlier days, we attach great importance to the common cultural heritage, common aspirations and mutual bonds of cordial and neighbourly relations which we share with friendly nations in our own part of the world.
164.	While we adhere firmly to our own ideology, we do not oppose any other ideology. We believe not only in the United Nations but in a united world within the United Nations, a principle which does not permit us to favour the existence of any arrangement or organization which would divide peoples and nations of the world into two or more opposing camps, or policies which would harm the principle of universality of this Organization.
165.	While we are not opposed to the unity of nations in small or large peaceful groups, dedicated to making more effective contributions towards world peace and security, we do not favour the existence of any blocs or any military alliances, which have proved or will prove to be a possible source of International tension or lack of confidence between the nations of the world.
166.	To give a true expression to the policy of my Government in this connexion, I should immediately add that we have never criticized and we never shall criticize the policies of any Government, nor shall we question what they consider to be the right path in the direction of their interests, but we do hope that all paths of individual or collective policies will lead towards the only true goal, the interest of mankind as a whole. This we believe is the true spirit of the  Charter of the United Nations, which we shall keep in mind during the discussion of all questions which arise before this General Assembly.
167.	It is with great faith and a deep conviction In the Principles and Purposes of the United Nations that we greet the thirteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly. I say this with full awareness of the criticism made of the activities of this Organization, the doubts in the minds of certain sections of the public in almost every country, and the confusion about the effectiveness of the efforts of the United Nations, particularly in the political field. This confusion has emanated partly from the fact that, while the activities of the United Nations in the economic, social and cultural fields are not well known to the public, they have been overshadowed by the heavy clouds of international tension and constant threats to peace and security, enhanced mostly by those who have power over the media of information and propaganda.
168.	We have stated at previous sessions of the General Assembly, and we should like to state again, that our only ambition is to promote the economic, social and cultural conditions in our country and try to become a useful member of the family of nations. We wish to maintain our friendship with all nations of the world, and to achieve our alms in an atmosphere of co-operation, understanding and peace. We wish the fulfilment of this common aspiration for all nations everywhere.
169.	Our approach to all questions will be guided by our impartial and independent judgement of international affairs, and our decisions will be made on the merits of the cases which are presented for our consideration. We are doing this with unalterable determination, in spite of a realization of all the difficulties and complications which the solution of human problems always involves. We are aware of all the difficulties which quite normally would confront any gathering of eighty-one nations, but we feel confident that we can still hope and that we can still avoid disappointment.