1.	The General Assembly of the United Nations, whose chief task is to maintain international peace and security, is meeting at a time when that peace and security are seriously threatened in the Near and Far East by the aggressive policy of the great Western Powers, and above all by that of the United States. It is meeting at a time when the fundamental problem of disarmament remains unsolved, when more than ever before it is essential that, in order that peace may be safeguarded and humanity moved from the danger of atomic war, an end should be put to the cold war and to the "position of strength" policy pursued by the rulers of the United States, and that relations between States with different social systems should be based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and on the well-known principle of peaceful coexistence.
2.	The peoples of the whole world are firmly opposed to war and in favour of peace. They have the right to expect from the General Assembly resolute action to remove the threat of war and to safeguard peace. In the Near East a strained situation continues to exist. The causes of this situation must be sought in the intolerable policy of interference of the Western great Powers, which, as we all know, has taken the form of armed aggression in Suez, Lebanon and Jordan.
3.	In less than two years, the General Assembly has been forced to devote two emergency special sessions to the dangerous situation created in the Near East by the aggressive policy of those Powers. It has condemned the aggressors, and through its resolutions on the questions of Suez, Lebanon and Jordan it has served the cause of the independence of peoples and of peace.
4.	By the resolution adopted unanimously on 21 August 1958 (resolution 1237 (ES-III)] at its third emergency special session, the General Assembly requested the early withdrawal of the armed forces of the United States and the United Kingdom from Lebanon and Jordan respectively. The delegation of Albania notes, however, that more than five weeks have already passed since then and that the situation has not changed. United States and British troops continue to occupy Lebanon and Jordan, The Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom have not so far done anything to carry out the General Assembly’s recommendations. They have not fixed a definite time limit for the withdrawal of their troops. In our opinion, the General Assembly is entitled to be officially informed by the United States and United Kingdom Governments of the date on which they will withdraw their troops from Lebanon and Jordan. Until they do so, there can be no peace or security in the countries of the Near and Middle East, and provocative measures on their part are possible.
5.	It is doubtful whether the United States and the United Kingdom Governments have any wish to withdraw their troops from those countries. They seem, rather, to be seeking some other pretext to keep them there as long as possible. The General Assembly and world public opinion expect the troops to be withdrawn without delay.
6.	The United States Government lays great stress on its proposal for the establishment of a United Nations armed force, intended in the first place for the Near and Middle East. There is reason to think, however, that the United States wants to ensure that under cover of the United Nations flag its troops will remain in the area. My delegation firmly opposes the establishment of a United Nations armed force, which it considers would not only be inadequate and useless, but would be harmful to the cause of peace and to the work of the United Nations itself.
7.	The Albanian people, which has itself experienced imperialist oppression and colonial feudal exploitation, is fully in sympathy with the heroic struggle for national liberation of the peoples subjected to colonialism, and indignantly denounces the crimes of the imperialist colonizers against the peoples of Algeria, Oman, Yemen, Cyprus and West Irian, which is an integral part of Indonesia.
8.	We believe that the General Assembly cannot remain indifferent to this situation. It must recognize the inalienable right to independence of the gallant Algerian people; it must protect the peoples oppressed by imperialism. We are convinced that the struggle for freedom of all the peoples still under the colonial yoke is irresistible and that it will triumph in the end. As always, my delegation will at the present session give full support to this noble and just cause.
9.	The General Assembly and the peoples of the whole world are rightly concerned at the very serious situation created in the Far East in the Taiwan region by the aggressive policy of the United States towards the People's Republic of China. Because of this policy, an abnormal and absurd situation persists in the United Nations itself, where the great Chinese people, numbering more than 600 million, is still not represented. For several years now, under the pretext of supporting its puppet, Chiang Kai-shek, who was defeated and driven out by the Chinese people as a traitor to his country, the United States has occupied, illegally and by force, the large island of Taiwan and a certain number of Chinese coastal islands which are in all respects an integral part of China.
10.	The United States itself solemnly recognized this by its declarations at Cairo and Potsdam. The facts show that the United States occupied the Islands in order to use them as a base for aggression against the People's Republic of China and other peace-loving States. Now, so as to give some semblance of justification to its aggression, the United States Government does not hesitate to deny that this territory is Chinese, and even to accuse the People's Republic of China of "attempting to extend their authority to these areas by the use of naked force", as Mr. Dulles said in the Assembly on 18 September 1958 [749th meeting].
11.	Who then is the aggressor? Is it the People's Republic of China, which is defending itself and wishes to liberate its own territory, or is it the United States, which has sent its armed forces 10,000 kilometres to occupy Chinese islands? Recently the United States, hiding behind Chiang Kai-shek, has intensified its provocative activity against the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of the People's Republic of China, and has actually made preparations for war. It has already set up a unified operational command in Taiwan, not far from the coast of the People's Republic of China, it has concentrated large air, land and sea forces in the area, including six aircraft carriers and more than 130 other warships. It has sent rockets of the Hercules and Matador types. The United States propaganda services boast that the United States has concentrated in the Taiwan area the greatest air and sea striking force in history, whilst the United States Secretary of the Air Force stated only two days ago that this country was ready to use nuclear weapons in the Chinese crisis.
12.	The aggressors should not, however, forget that the great Chinese people cannot be intimidated by atomic threats and blackmail, that it is strong and united in support of its Government and determined to liberate Taiwan and the other Chinese islands and unite them to the mother country, and that it can always count on the unconditional support of the countries of the Socialist camp, led by the Soviet Union,
13.	The aggressive activity of the United States in the Taiwan area has aroused anxiety and indignation amongst all peoples, including the people of the United States. Does President Eisenhower realize, a leading British newspaper asked the other day, that throughout the world United States policy in the Far East is considered senseless?
14.	The threat of a general conflict hangs over humanity and the full responsibility for this must be borne by the United States. We believe that urgent measures must be taken to avoid the worst. Certain representatives, both in the General Assembly and outside the United Nations, have suggested that in order to relieve tension in the Taiwan area there should be a cease-fire and the off-shore islands of Quemoy and Matsu should be demilitarized. We can well understand the desire of these representatives to come to the aid of their United States friends, who have put themselves in a most difficult position, but in my delegation's opinion the measures suggested are ineffective and completely unwarranted. What sort of cease-fire is being proposed and between which countries? The People's Republic of China is not at war with the United States, so it would be absurd to suggest a cease-fire between the two countries. Moreover, the islands of Quemoy and Matsu, like Taiwan, are part of Chinese territory. Chiang Kai-shek and his men, who, with the support of the United States, occupy those islands, are also Chinese. How the Chinese people will free the islands from the control of Chiang Kai-shek is a purely infernal affair, which concerns the Chinese people alone.
15.	On 6 September 1958, the Government; of the People's Republic of China solemnly declared: "The Chinese people have every right to liberate their own territory by all suitable means at a suitable time, and will not tolerate any foreign interference." That is the firm decision of the Chinese people, whom no provocation or threat can cow.
16.	It is clear that there are no grounds whatever for contemplating a cease-fire or the demilitarization of the off-shore islands. The sole cause of the existing tension in the Taiwan area is United States interference. Let that interference cease, and tension will immediately be relaxed.
17.	The Government and people of the People's Republic of China, like all the peace-loving Governments and peoples of the world, demand the immediate withdrawal of United States armed forces from Taiwan, from the other Chinese islands and from the Taiwan Strait, as the only solution to the serious crisis which the situation in the Far East represents for world peace.
18.	The Albanian Government and people, as emphasized in our Government's declaration of 15 September 1958, whole-heartedly support their friends and allies, the people of China, in their just cause. On 1 October, two days from now, the great Chinese people will be celebrating the ninth anniversary of their historic victory over feudal and imperialist oppression and the anniversary of the proclamation of the People's Republic of China which in so short a time has become a factor for peace and progress in Asia and throughout the world. The Albanian people wish them complete victory in their efforts to liberate Taiwan and the other occupied Chinese islands, and further success in the peaceful reconstruction of their country.
19.	An important factor in the increase of international tension is the armaments race, which has how passed the bounds of all imagination. We believe that any agreement or any measure to limit or restrict the armaments race would contribute directly to a relaxation of tension and to the safeguarding of peace.
20. Disarmament is still the great question of the hour. Several years have gone by and no concrete result has been achieved either inside or outside the United Nations, owing to the fundamentally negative attitude of the Powers belonging to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) aggressive bloc and above all of the United States, which bears full responsibility for this state of affairs.
21.	The Soviet Government, persisting in its patient efforts to solve the disarmament problem, now proposes that It should be taken up by stages and that separate agreements should be arrived at on its different aspects. The memorandum on measures in the field of disarmament [A/3929] which it has put forward at this session offers a whole series of realistic proposals in this connexion which cannot fail to receive the active support of all Member States truly desirous of rescuing the disarmament problem from the deadlock which it has now reached.
22.	Also at the suggestion of the Soviet delegation [A/39151. the General Assembly is to consider the question of the discontinuance of atomic and hydrogen weapons tests. The Government of the People's Republic of Albania has always been in favour of the immediate and unconditional cessation of nuclear weapons tests, as well as the complete prohibition of the use and production of these weapons of mass destruction, and has supported the use of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes. Our delegation therefore warmly approves the Soviet proposal.
23.	The USSR's unilateral decision to suspend, from 31 March 1958, all nuclear weapons tests was greeted as a historic and highly humanitarian act. The other atomic powers, however, namely the United States and the United Kingdom, did not follow this example but instead intensified their tests and are in fact still carrying them out.
24.	After the positive results achieved by the Conference of Experts from eight countries held at Geneva, the pretext that it is impossible to control all nuclear tests, put forward by the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, has been shown to be quite groundless. The declarations of the United States [A/3895] and the United Kingdom [A/ 3896/Rev.1] dated 22 August 1958, with all the conditions which they imposed, would appear to be directed towards preventing an agreement, while at the same time seeking to prepare the ground in advance for casting the responsibility for failure on the Soviet Union.
25.	The world is tired of this farce which has been going on for so long and demands action. We should like to hope that this time the General Assembly will succeed in adopting some positive decision on this great issue.
26.	It is almost twelve months since the USSR was the first to realize one of mankind's boldest and finest dreams. It opened the way for the conquest of cosmic space. The Soviet Union, anxious that this great scientific victory should serve exclusively peaceful ends, has asked the General Assembly to examine the question of banning the use of cosmic space for military purposes, together with the elimination of foreign military bases on the territories of other countries and international co-operation in the study of. cosmic space [A/3818 and Corr.1]. The United States delegation on the other hand merely requested the consideration of a programme for international co-operation in the field of outer space [A/3902],
27.	The Albanian delegation believes that the Soviet delegation's manner of putting the problem is the only correct one and the only one capable of leading to joint and useful action on behalf of peace and international co-operation, whereas the limited proposal of the United States would appear to be designed rather to secure strategic advantages.
28.	Albania is whole-heartedly in favour of the Soviet proposal for a 10 to 15 per cent reduction in the military budgets of the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom and France, and the use of part of the savings so effected for assistance to the underdeveloped countries [A/3925]. This is a very important suggestion from the humanitarian point of view and at the same time a positive step towards disarmament and an international detente.
29.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania has always supported any sincere attempts to remove the danger of war and consolidate peace and international co-operation. It therefore greeted the Soviet Government's proposal for a summit conference with enthusiasm. It also supported the proposal of the Polish People's Republic for the creation of a no-man's land for atomic weapons in central Europe, and the recent proposal of the German Democratic Republic regarding the conclusion of a peace treaty with Germany. Albania is willing to participate in a non-aggression pact between the Warsaw Treaty countries, of which it is one, and the members of NATO. It is also in favour of the liquidation of opposing military groups and the conclusion of a general pact for European collective security.
30.	The Albanian Government considers that the installation of rocket launching sites by the United States on the territory of other NATO countries constitutes, in conjunction with the remilitarization of Western Germany, another great threat to peace and the security of the peoples of Europe.
31.	Anxious to protect its national independence and sovereignty, in the Interest of friendly relations with Italy and also in order to ward off the danger of an atomic war in the Adriatic and Balkan region, the Government of the People's Republic of Albania recently made an important approach to the Italian Government. According to information available to the Albanian Government, negotiations were already under way in the spring of this year between Italy and the United States regarding the installation of rocket launching sites in Italy, which would obviously be directed against the neighbouring peoples' democracies, and first and foremost against the People's Republic of Albania, which is Italy's close neighbour.
32.	Naturally, the Albanian Government could not remain indifferent in the face of such a situation. On 2 July 1958, therefore, it addressed a note to the Italian Government in which, after first explaining its views on the matter, it requested that Government in the most friendly manner to forego its plan to install rocket launching sites on Italian territory. The note explained that if that was not done, and if Italy agreed to the installation of such sites on Italian territory, the Albanian Government felt it its duty to warn the Government of Italy that Albania would be compelled, in order to defend its national sovereignty and independence, to take steps to see that rocket launching sites were also installed on Albanian territory. Full responsibility for such a development would lie with the Government of Italy.
33.	We regret to have to note that our friendly approach did not meet with the desired reception and understanding on the part of the Italian Government. As announced in the American Press on 25 September 1958, Italy and the United States have reached an agreement in principle whereby launching sites for rockets of the Jupiter type will be installed on Italian territory before the end of 1958. As we indicated in our note of 2 July 1958, full responsibility for the consequences of this agreement will rest with the Italian Government.
34.	The People's Republic of Albania follows a policy of peace and friendship towards all countries regardless of their social system. This policy is based on the principle of peaceful coexistence. We have the greatest interest in safeguarding peace, and we should like to devote all our resources and all our energies to the peaceful reconstruction of our own country, which experienced fearful sufferings in the past from war, devastation, imperialist occupation and feudal aggression. Thanks to the extraordinary efforts of our people and Government and to the fraternal assistance of the USSR and the People's Republic of China and the other peoples' democracies, we have already achieved remarkable success in industry, mining, agriculture and cultural-development. We are determined to press forward on this way which will ensure the welfare and progress of our people. The People's Republic of Albania regards the friendship and close understanding which unites it with the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries as a guarantee of its territorial integrity, its independence and its national sovereignty.
35.	The Albanian Government also attaches special importance to the development of friendly and good neighbourly relations with other countries, particularly with its neighbours. It considers that it is its duty to try its best to make the Adriatic and Balkan regions a zone of peace and fruitful co-operation based on the principle of peaceful coexistence. Nevertheless, our Government and people will always reject in the sharpest possible terms any outside interference in their domestic affairs and any provocation against their country. We cannot relax our vigilance in the face of the hostile policy and activities directed against our country by certain members of the NATO aggressive bloc. On many occasions, there have been combined sea and air manoeuvres by United States forces and those of other NATO countries on the very edge of our territorial waters. American and other aircraft violate our air space. Vicious radio propaganda is broadcast against the People's Republic of Albania every day by the Voice of America, the BBC in London and other broadcasting centres.
36.	The Albanian Government greeted the birth of the United Arab Republic as a realization of the profound aspirations of the peoples of Egypt and Syria and as a victory for Arab nationalism. Our people rejoiced at the victory of the revolutionary forces in Iraq and diplomatic relations have already been established between our two countries. We consider that the recent establishment of diplomatic relations with Turkey and Ethiopia corresponds to our peaceful interests and to the requirements of peace. The Government of the People's Republic of Albania has more than once declared itself willing to establish and develop normal diplomatic, commercial and cultural relations with other countries on the basis of equality, mutual respect and reciprocal advantage. Our Government is sparing no effort to strengthen its relations and peaceful cooperation with other countries. It is therefore wholeheartedly in agreement with the Czechoslovak proposal regarding measures aimed at the implementation and promotion of peaceful and neighbourly relations among States [A/3847  Add.1]. The Government of the People's Republic of Albania considers that it is the duty of all Member States to act at all times in such a way that the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations Charter are put into practice in their international relations. Many of the items on the agenda of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly are vital to the cause of peace and international co-operation. My delegation wishes the Assembly every success in carrying out the heavy task which lies before it.