
99.	The Austrian delegation believes it to be of significance that the General Assembly has elected as President of its thirteenth session a man who during a long and brilliant career in the service of his country has been guided by the same principles and ideals that have found their universal and compelling expression in the Charter of the United Nations. These aims and principles constitute the unalterable basis of the Austrian foreign policy, the more so since the universally accepted rules of international law are an integral part of the Austrian Constitution.
100.	The everlasting neutrality which was proclaimed by our Parliament of its own free will after the conclusion of the Austrian State Treaty in 1955, has not in any way prevented us, nor shall it prevent us in the future, from co-operating actively in discussing and solving the manifold and frequently complex problems of our age. We even believe that it is precisely cur particular geographic location, at the dividing line between two worlds, and the specific mentality of our people, as well as our international status, which give us a special opportunity to contribute, in given circumstances, towards the bridging of existing differences by means of clarification and mediation.
101.	It was with great satisfaction that Austria took note of the resolution adopted unanimously by the General Assembly at its special session [resolution 1237 (ES-III)] with respect to the conflict in the Near East. This resolution not only prevented an extension of the crisis in this crucial area of the world, but contributed to a further strengthening of the authority of this organization. The Secretary-General of the United Nations was entrusted with the highly responsible task of working out constructive proposals for the peaceful evolution and economic development of the Near East. The Austrian delegation places the highest confidence in the diplomatic skill of the Secretary-General through whose initiative a previous dangerous conflict in the Middle East area was settled in 1956. The experience gained at that time with relation to the United Nations Emergency Force justifies the hope that we will succeed in creating a permanent United Nations peace force that may also be used if needed in other parts of the world. If called upon, Austria is in principle prepared to co-operate in such an undertaking.
102.	Closely connected with the solution of the crisis in the Near East is the question of the Palestine refugees, a problem which has at last to be eliminated not only for political but also for humanitarian reasons. We Austrians know from our own experience with European refugees about the physical and moral hardship of displaced persons, and we can with due modesty, point to our contribution towards alleviating their situation. Since 1945 Austria has granted asylum to more than one million of these unfortunate human beings. Far more than 200,000 have found their permanent home in Austria. Additional efforts by the -other States of the United Nations will, however, be necessary to bring about a final solution of this problem in conformity with the suggestions and the appeal of both the High Commissioner for Refugees and the Director of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency in the Near East.
103. Unfortunately, the hopeful atmosphere resulting from the emergency special session of the General Assembly and the subsequent relaxation of tension in the Near East was soon thereafter disturbed by another serious crisis this time in the Far East. We hope that direct negotiations between the Powers concerned will succeed in bringing about a realistic solution of those problems which are at the root of this crisis. Such a solution, however, can only be found if all parties concerned abstain from the use of force according to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
104.	In view of the ominous development of modern means of mass destruction, mankind realizes more and more that international conflicts cannot possibly be solved by force. This realization is one further and compelling reason for discontinuing the dangerous as well as senseless armaments race and the staggering inflation of military budgets. Indeed, is It not the most urgent task of our generation to deal with this question without consideration of prestige or propaganda in that spirit of responsibility and objectivity which alone can lead to its solution? Fortunately, new perspectives have opened up in this field which give rise to the hope that there will be an Improvement in the international climate and a greater willingness on the part of the big Powers to reach a mutual understanding. The specific results of the Conference of Experts in Geneva on the technical feasibility of controlling nuclear tests, the readiness of the big Powers to negotiate an agreement regarding the suspension of such tests, as well as their willingness to discuss safeguards against surprise attacks, all lead to the hope that the deadlock In the disarmament discussions will at long last be broken and that a settlement of the problem will gradually be achieved. Positive results regarding these technical details could pave the way to a global agreement on disarmament.
105.	The recent developments in the field of technology, reaching into outer space, create new serious problems which call for clarification. We therefore welcome the fact that the General Assembly at its thirteenth session will deal with this matter in order to initiate a study on the peaceful use of outer space.
106.	This very day also happens lobe the opening day of the second session of the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Organization in Vienna. One year ago, I expressed from this rostrum my deep satisfaction that Vienna was chosen as the sent of this Agency. The Austrian Government has put at Its disposal all the facilities necessary for the efficient working of this organization. We are confident that at this session, the General Conference will succeed in achieving tangible results on the road towards harnessing atomic energy for peaceful use.
107.	In the interest of a lasting and genuine peace, it seems to us indispensable that the United Nations should intensify its efforts to create better living conditions for all peoples of the world. The unprecedented achievements of technology provide new means of mastering these tasks more rapidly and more efficiently than heretofore. We have learned with great satisfaction that new projects for the economic development of the under-developed countries have been submitted to this Assembly. We welcome the establishment of a United Nations Special Fund for this purpose, the setting up of long-range projects should, however, be accompanied by long-range credits for their implementation and should also meet regional requirements,
108.	The creation of better living conditions Is also an essential prerequisite for the peaceful co-existence of all nations. The attitude of the Austrian Government as to this question was clearly expressed at the twelfth session of the General Assembly, The Austrian Government Is convinced that in this divided world in which we have to live peaceful co-operation between nations is of decisive Importance. We believe, however, that this co-operation, in order to be realty fruitful, should be guided by respect for the fundamental human rights on which the Charter of the United Nations is based. We have therefore never hesitated to stand for freedom and human dignity. No one can accuse a country like Austria at ulterior motives when it raises its voice in defence of humanity. As the representative of this country I wish, therefore, to take this opportunity to address a renewed appeal to our neighbour State, Hungary, to grant an amnesty to all those who, following the events of October 1956, are still in prison. But at the same time I appeal to the responsible statesmen of all other nations, whatever their form of government, in which human beings are being deprived of freedom or equal rights on account of their political or religious convictions, their race or language.
109.	May this spirit of tolerance and humanity prevail among those taking part in the forthcoming deliberations of the General Assembly of the United Nations. The difficulties of our task and the limits of our possibilities we do not ignore. But much can be achieved if we are guided by right, justice and mutual understanding.