1.	I realize that the general debate is losing its first impetus, and that everything that can be said about world peace, as well as about matters of lesser importance, has already been said. As spokesman for Colombia I cannot claim that my speech will contain anything strikingly new. I shall confine myself to giving a brief account of my Government's views on certain aspects of international policy.
2.	Colombia believes that the most effective way of serving the interests of peace is not merely to speak about its inestimable benefits, which in theory are recognized by all, but to take positive action to reach the desired goal.
3.	The word "peace" must not continue to be used as a mask to cover other purposes and disguise the warlike intentions of certain States. It often happens that in the name of peace we find ourselves in danger of becoming involved in disputes which can have the effect of impairing friendly relations between peoples. In the name of peace, congresses and conferences are held that constitute the best psychological preparation for war. Mankind is now watching the reckless progress of a feverish arms race conducted by the great Powers in the name of peace. The banner of peace has been raised in such contradictory causes that if we continue to act in this manner the day may come when the human race will destroy itself to an accompaniment of hymns and hosannas to peace.
4.	We have been impressed by the fact that the world situation has led scientists and technicians to concentrate mainly on the production of diabolical weapons of war, while there has been a deplorable neglect of scientific projects that could lead to positive progress in raising the level of civilization and human welfare. If the campaign against the deadly effects of cancer, for example, had been able to dispose of the economic and scientific resources made available for the production of nuclear weapons, mankind might now be free of one of its greatest scourges, at the cost of not being able to destroy itself quite so rapidly and effectively as it can today.
5.	At the present time such observations may seem somewhat romantic and not likely to lead to any practical results, but they may serve to illustrate the ideals of a Latin American nation which believes that mankind will benefit more from progress in literature and the arts, from the fight against illiteracy, from advances in medicine and the raising of the standard of living of God's noble creature, man than from mere excursions into outer space. In the final analysis the great problem of the world is the problem of the individual human being, who has gradually become over- shadowed by the pagan deity of the State, and whom we must restore to his true place if we sincerely believe in spiritual, values.
6.	Technological progress can be achieved, and has been achieved, by different systems, but that which forms the very basis of Western civilization, which we advocate and which corresponds to our deepest convictions, is the equal partnership of freedom and science, in which the spirit is not subordinated to or valued less than technology.
7.	It would be indeed foolish not to recognize the extraordinary progress achieved by those peoples who put their faith in the State rather than in man. The materialistic societies can certainly point to an impressive record of technological progress; in this field their achievements have equalled those of the Western world. It is in the broad realm of the spirit that they have nothing to offer us, and they disclaim the heritage of spiritual values which for us is as vital as life itself.
8.	Peace is the result of a compromise between States, and the reward of tolerance, and its preservation clearly depends on the efforts made even by those most diametrically opposed, to permit the coexistence of two forces differing greatly in their philosophies. Colombia's position in defence of Western civilization is based not merely on its geographical position but also on feelings that are deeply rooted in its fundamental beliefs.
9.	My country believes that it is only through tolerance and mutual understanding that we can achieve the peaceful coexistence of peoples. I say this as the result of my country's own experience. The hostility which divided the two major political parties in Colombia made possible the triumph of a dictatorship, claiming to have military backing, which not only destroyed our liberties but also ruined our economy. In fact of this grave danger the political parties united and agreed on a system of government by joint responsibility which won the full support of all shades of: opinion and especially of the armed forces themselves. This agreement brought about the overthrow of tyranny and made it possible to rebuild our legal institutions and to strengthen peace. I can therefore speak today as the representative of a democratic and law-abiding nation, a republic entitled to preach tolerance because, as a result of its internal struggles, each of the two great political parties that reflect public opinion has renounced the idea of governing exclusively. Democracy in Colombia is based on public opinion and is practised with the support of the armed forces, which defend these ideals of democracy not only within our own borders but also, as in Korea, in the service of freedom under United Nations command.
10.	Those nations which can never be considered as military Powers and which are conscious of their strict limitations, can nevertheless serve the interests of peace, not only within the United Nations where, thanks to recognition of the juridical equality of States, they can bring their influence to bear in the most vital decisions, but more especially in the sphere of public opinion, by refusing their support to dangerous measures and by fully endorsing measures that contribute to the cause of peace and promote closer understanding and harmony among States.
11.	We believe in the tremendous power of public opinion, in the decisive impact it can have on the historical destinies of nations, and in the influence it can exert to avert the harmful effects of the war of words that characterizes the era of armed peace through which the world is now living.
12.	Any nation which cannot make itself either feared or courted, owing to its insignificance from a military standpoint, and which therefore cannot indulge in the pastime of sabre-rattling, has a special duty to help create, through its peaceable views, an atmosphere of peace and harmony in which the futility of any extreme measures would be obvious. I speak on behalf of a country whose views have strength only in that they reflect the nation's purity of purpose and its devotion to the principles of law.
13.	Perhaps I am indulging in wishful thinking, but certain trends in public opinion seem to me to indicate that the spectre of another war is receding, in spite of the tension which seems to exist between the two societies into which our world is divided. The reasonable way in which the effective help of the United Nations has been used to resolve highly critical problems, the realization by all the Powers that another armed conflict would lead to total destruction, the weariness resulting from the protracted cold war and the obvious human desire for concord, all appear to be bringing States around to agree on the establishment of the long period of peace that mankind needs for its development, and for which it longs in order to find rest.
14.	The preservation of peace requires special preventive measures, since in some cases situations arise which, if not brought under control in their initial stages, may lead to undesirable and dangerous developments. In this connexion, and in order to prevent the frequent occurrence of unexpected situations that might lead to conflicts, Colombia warmly endorses the proposal that the Secretary-General should send United Nations observers to those regions and countries where it is thought advisable to have direct representatives of this Organization.
15.	We are gratified to note that the United Nations is making great progress towards universality. A comparison of the number of countries represented at San Francisco with the list of States which are now Members of the Organization justifies the assertion that the United Nations has followed, as far as possible, an open-door policy. There is reason to believe that before many years have passed, and following the principles which have guided us so far, the Organization will receive new Members until the day comes when all nations will be able to express their views here. When that day comes the Organization will be further strengthened, and we believe that its decisions will carry more weight and find wider acceptance.
16.	Colombia knows that its duty as a Latin American country is to foster continental unity, and it pointed out at the Foreign Ministers' Conference in Washington that the Latin American countries will carry more influence in world affairs if they work in concert and consolidate their unity, instead of breaking up into an archipelago of separate opinions. The Washington Conference strengthened the bonds of solidarity of the hemisphere and emphasized the common destiny of the Latin American nations. Those countries, far from seeking to establish a threatening alliance, have joined in the common purpose of serving the cause of peace and reaffirming their unshakable faith in the principles of the Charter.
17.	At the Foreign Ministers' Conference we laid the foundation for a fruitful policy of economic co-operation that will promote continental harmony, since any measures to eliminate inequalities among nations and peoples are certain to produce sound and promising results. We wish to reaffirm that in this democratic continent all nations can achieve standards of living which will enable them to put their trust in the soundness of the principles they proclaim, and show that economic independence can go hand-in-hand with political freedom.
18.	In the regional sphere we wish to give our unwavering support to a policy designed to save the citizens of Latin America from the bondage of disease, illiteracy and poverty. This is an undertaking which demands a continuing effort and requires the unity of the whole hemisphere and the active co-operation of the United States, whose new stand towards Latin America gives us confidence in a happy future. As Latin Americans we are also very grateful to the great Republic of Brazil for the notable efforts it has made in helping to develop this new policy.
19.	Colombia would like to put on record one happy result of the new attitude of the United States: the signing of the Latin American Coffee Pact on 27 September 1958 in Washington. This agreement covers the fifteen coffee-producing countries and regulates prices in a market whose total value amounts to some $2,000 million per year. For us coffee is not merely a commercial product but is the very basis of our economy and the mainstay of our currency. Life other basic commodities in other Latin American countries, coffee is the principal factor in our economic prosperity and thus in our political stability and social solidarity.
20.	After this necessary digression on exclusively continental affairs, I should like to return to the world situation, not to weary the Assembly with further observations but to voice the optimism of the young nations of Latin America with regard to the future of mankind. Colombia does not believe that any action it may take can have a decisive influence in the development of world events, but our material weakness does not relieve us of the responsibility to servo the cause of peace and to reaffirm our faith in democracy and the eternal spiritual values.