176.	I will first say a few words about disarmament. Denmark has always followed with keen interest the discussions of the United Nations on the question of disarmament. In action, too, we have demonstrated that we are determined to contribute towards a solution. Thus, the Danish Government declared itself in agreement, in principle, to Danish territory being included in the inspection zones proposed for Europe and the Arctic regions. When the question of establishing an Arctic inspection zone was recently brought up again in the United Nations by the United States, we confirmed our readiness to allow the Greenland territories north of the Arctic Circle to be incorporated in such a zone.
177.	The Danish Government — and I can say the Danish people — earnestly hope that we may very soon be able to break the present deadlock in the disarmament negotiations. Denmark has not been able to accede to the proposal of allowing all States Members of the United Nations a seat on the Disarmament Commission because we must stress the importance of the Commission's being so constituted as to function in a practical way. It Is a question not just of having a few members more or less, but of securing a workable Commission: and it should not be forgotten that the great Powers bear the major responsibility in this matter.
178.	The obstacles which negotiations on disarmament have encountered in the United Nations should not cause this forum to be given up as the proper place for dealing with the problem. Retention of this question within the framework of the United Nations does not; however, preclude a summit meeting between East and West.
179.	In line with this, Denmark has fully supported the efforts being made to achieve progress in the disarmament field through East-West discussions at the level of Heads of Government. Even though the preparatory diplomatic talks on such a meeting have been discontinued since the middle of June, the most recent developments seem to hold out some hope of a more positive trend in the whole disarmament question being within sight. I am thinking primarily of the Conference of Experts to Study the Possibility of Detecting Violations of a Possible Agreement on the Suspension of Nuclear Tests which was recently held in Geneva and which resulted in agreement on the technical prerequisites of a control system, the subsequent declarations by the United States [A/3895] and the United Kingdom [A/3896] on the suspension of their nuclear weapons tests and, finally, the Soviet Union's acceptance [A/3904] of the proposal made by the two Western Powers for negotiations to be initiated at the end of October on an agreement to cover the controlled suspension of nuclear weapons tests. Also, the agreement on expert studies of control measures to prevent surprise attacks appears to us to be a step forward.
180.	Naturally, it is confidence among nations which, in the last resort, decides whether a real relaxation of tension can be brought about. This confidence can hardly be created in one single move, and consequently it would be too ambitious to entertain hopes of achieving more comprehensive plans for disarmament at the present moment. The Danish Government therefore urges that disarmament efforts should be concentrated on the attainment of solutions by stages.
181.	We agree with the Secretary-General in the view that the more we try to “depoliticize” the outstanding issues by referring them to discussion at the technical level the better are the prospects of achieving favourable results. Denmark therefore finds it worth considering that the practical implementation of possible control measures agreed upon on the basis of the Geneva talks concerning the suspension of nuclear weapon tests should be delegated to a special administrative body within the United Nations.
182.	As to the problems of outer space which are gaining increasing interest with the constant progress made in the field of technology, we shall give our full support to efforts aimed at bringing about, through joint discussions, an international agreement to promote scientific co-operation and to ensure that outer space shall be used solely for peaceful purposes. We also fully support the proposal for the setting up under the auspices of the United Nations of an agency to promote international scientific co-operation on the exploration of space.
183.	In Denmark we witnessed with satisfaction how the tension in the Middle East was successfully eased through the United Nations. We felt, and we still feel, that this question is of such a nature that, it naturally comes under the United Nations. Accordingly, during the crisis Denmark whole-heartedly supported the desire to have the matter discussed and settled within the framework of the United Nations.
184.	The Danish Government is of the opinion that the events in the Middle East have once again demonstrated the great value of an international forum such as the United Nations to deal with situations where the welfare of the entire world depends upon a successful settlement. Among the States Members of the United Nations there are widely differing opinions about the recent happenings in the Middle East. These differences were also expressed when the crisis was considered in the Security Council and at the third emergency special session of the General Assembly convened to deal with the question. Notwithstanding this, it eventually proved possible at the third emergency special session to muster unanimous support for a resolution drafted by the Arab States themselves [resolution 1237 (ES-III)]. This paved the way for a constructive and, we hope, lasting settlement of the many and complex problems that are still outstanding in the Middle East. Together with other nations, Denmark contributed, in accordance with its principles, towards the achievement of results acceptable to all parties. Denmark will continue to give its full support to the efforts of the United Nations to solve the extraordinarily difficult political and economic problems in the Middle East.
185.	We now look forward to the Secretary-General's report on the results of negotiations which he has been conducting with States in the Middle East. It is to be hoped that the United Nations, in co-operation with these States, will be able to reach a settlement which will bring about peace and prepare the ground for the economic progress needed in the whole of that area.
186.	In this connexion, I must stress one of the proposals mentioned at the third emergency special session of the General Assembly as a means of preventing the existing antagonisms from leading to aggressive action, namely, the question of establishing a stand-by United Nations peace force [A/3878]. The General Assembly is aware that Denmark is among the countries that have provided troops for the United Nations Emergency Force in the Gaza sector. Naturally, it is not possible at the present juncture finally to assess the usefulness of this Force — this question will be fully discussed later on the basis of the Secretary-General's reports under item 65 of the agenda — but so much may already be said that the Emergency Force has apparently contributed greatly towards easing tensions in that area. With this experience in mind, there is reason to believe that a more permanent arrangement, or arrangements, for an armed United Nations force would have a favourable effect in a future emergency, namely, that of producing a calmer atmosphere and of gaining time, so that the United Nations could consider and possibly carry out measures to remove or lessen the causes of the; crisis. The solution of the question of such a United Nations force will involve difficulties and the question of, its application will give rise, to problems, but there is every reason to assume that the United Nations will succeed in overcoming those difficulties and reaching agreement on the competence and functions of the force.
187.	The Danish Government would consider It desirable that the Secretary-General be authorized by the General Assembly to make a study of the technical aspects and, on the basis thereof, to prepare such proposals as the study might Inspire, in our view, such proposals should be founded on the principle of voluntariness.
188.	Now a few remarks about the Far East. The present state of tension in the Far East occupies the minds of all of us. The differences between the directly concerned parties in the region are vast, and the Danish Government views with the greatest anxiety the attempts of the Peking Government to put through its territorial claims by force, a problem of the nature in question should be solved by negotiation, and not by the use of force. It would have been of considerable advantage If the conflicting views had been represented here and If, on that basis, the United Nations could have taken up the matter with a view to bringing about at least Immediate relief of tension as the prerequisite for further negotiations to obtain a lasting settlement. Regardless of the considerations that have operated to the contrary, we feel that we must maintain our fundamental attitude, which is that China should be represented in the United Nations by the Peking Government.
189.	In our desire to avert the use of armed force, we noted with satisfaction in Denmark that negotiations would be initiated in Warsaw between representatives of the People's Republic of China and of the United States of America. It is our hope that, through these negotiations, it will be possible to reach a solution, or at least to create the basis for further negotiations for a settlement in keeping with the spirit of the United Nations Charter.
190.	I shall now turn to the problems concerning the breadth of the territorial sea and the extent of fishery limits. One of the many topics to be dealt with by the General Assembly is the question of the breadth of the territorial sea. I believe that, like Denmark, many other countries attach great importance to this problem. The question is of great concern to my country, both as a seafaring nation and as a coastal State. Therefore, the Danish Government fully supported the proposal to convene a United Nations Conference on the Law Of the Sea, and the Danish delegation did its best to contribute to the work of this molt important Conference when it was held in Geneva last spring.
191.	As you all know, four significant conventions on the law of the sea, as well as a number of resolutions, were adopted. There is no doubt that, in many respects, the Conference obtained results which will prove to be of lasting value to the community of nations.
192.	Unfortunately, however, the two-lairds majority was not secured for any ruling on the breadth of the territorial, sea, and this extremely important question still remains to be solved. I fool that everything possible should be done to reach a clear decision on this question as soon as possible. If we do not succeed, we run the risk of exposing to real and actual danger the very principle of the freedom of the seas, one of the fundamentals of international law.
193.	It is the view of the Danish Government that the seas, should be open to all, and consequently, that coastal States should only extend their sovereignty over a narrow bolt along their coasts. In view of the technical and political developments of the past decades, we feel, however, that maintaining the classical three-mile limit is no longer feasible and that the maximum breadth of the territorial sea should be fixed at six nautical miles. The Danish Government is of the opinion that one should not go further than that, nor should countries generally be allowed to exercise special fishery rights beyond these six miles.
194.	My Government thinks, however, that one important exception to this should be made. In those special cases where populations are living in areas which, on account of their isolated geographical position, are dependent to an exceptionally high degree on the resources of the sea, provision should be made for the establishment of a special fishing territory of up to twelve nautical miles.
195.	At the Geneva Conference a resolution on the special position of such regions was adopted. During the debate it was clearly and expressly indicated that this resolution referred to areas such as Iceland, the Faroe Islands and Greenland, the latter two regions being parts of Denmark. In the Danish view this resolution does not seem sufficient. It appears to us that in really genuine cases, such as the islands I mentioned, where an isolated community lives under such conditions that its livelihood and entire economic development is dependent on the sea, it is necessary, indeed it is an act of justice, to safeguard the livelihood of these peoples. In our- view this should be done by giving the population in these areas the exclusive right to fish within a comparatively broad belt along their own coasts. Only by doing so can we give these populations the much needed feeling of having their existence safeguarded.
198.In line with the views I have briefly presented here, the Danish Government is of the opinion that it is an urgent task for the United Nations to proceed with this matter and to reach a clear and lasting solution as soon as possible. It might be possible, as suggested by my Icelandic colleague, for the General Assembly to take this matter into its own hands for immediate decision. My Government is deeply interested in the question and in its speedy solution. Should it prove most expedient to seek to have the matter solved at a new international conference, we shall strongly support a proposal for the prompt convening of such a conference.
197.	In the economic field, the United Nations, in our opinion, ought to intensify its efforts to achieve international co-operation in solving economic problems which we all realize are intimately related with our political problems. It is an important step in the right direction when the United Nations increasingly recognizes its collective responsibility for the level of prosperity of economically less developed areas.
198.	One of the important contributions this session of the General Assembly can make is to establish the Special Fund to begin operations in the coming year. We feel that the Fund’s resources, although important, are less significant than the fact that the Assembly recognizes its responsibility, through multilateral action, to raise the levels of living In the less developed countries of the world, I feel convinced that an honest and friendly co-operation of Member Governments, recipients as well as contributors, will benefit both and increase the possibility of furthering the much desired expansion of world trade.
199. May I say, in conclusion, that we live in an insecure world, but at the same time in a world with immense possibilities. At the cross-road between destruction and peaceful constructive possibilities there is no doubt which course mankind will wish to follow. The question is, which road will lead to the goal? Traditional diplomacy can undoubtedly help us on our way. But I think that all the eighty-one countries which are represented here will note with satisfaction that the United Nations Itself during recent events in international policy has proved itself to be a world political instrument of increasing significance. We are still at the beginning, but we are hopeful that tills constructive evolution will be further pursued.