96.	It is a great honour to be allowed to address you on behalf of the people and Government of Ecuador.
97.	By national inclination as well as by tradition, Ecuador has always been a zealous advocate of all the resources and instruments provided by international law for the maintenance of peace and security, and during the twelve years since the United Nations came into being, we have given firm and genuine support to the pursuit of the lofty purposes of this Organization. Ecuador has acted in this way with enthusiasm and with faith and proposes to continue doing so, in the conviction that in this community of nations, sustained by the high principles of the Charter, lies the possibility of maintaining and consolidating that peace which is sought by all men of goodwill.
98.	Much criticism has been levelled at the United Nations, time and time again, by different sectors of world opinion, and in most instances, the motive has been a logical and justifiable desire for effective action. However, although admittedly we have at times been disappointed we must nevertheless recognize that hopeful prospects have frequently opened before us. By their very nature, human achievements can never be perfect, and this is particularly true in the case of a world organization like the United Nations, which daily has to face tremendous difficulties, conflicting Interests, excessive ambitions, and the countless problems which all humanity fervently desires to see solved.
99.	We believe, nevertheless, that much has been achieved and we must recognize that this new multilateral diplomacy has produced results which give promise of a better world to come. The least we can do is to direct our hopes, and of course our efforts, towards that future.
100.	The seriousness of the problems with which the General Assembly is confronted make the current session one of particular importance. The political, psychological, technological and economic forces of present-day life have complicated international relations.
101.	Technical progress has enriched the inheritance of humanity which is now toying with the mysteries of the atom and penetrating the unknown world of cosmic space. Tempting possibilities have been revealed of both the atom and outer space being put to use for and by mankind. This is the positive outlook, and it is highly impressive. But the international prospect is sombre and dangerous if peace does not become the common goal.
102.	On the positive side, we are encouraged by the efforts in international co-operation being made through the International Atomic Energy Agency, with the object of giving all peoples an opportunity to make use of scientific progress to improve their economy, their living conditions and their culture. In the same way, the Second United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy held recently at Geneva, in an exemplary atmosphere of mutual understanding, is a source of gratification.
103.	It is equally gratifying to see that both the United States and the Soviet Union have taken the initiative of bringing before this Assembly the question of international co-operation in the study of outer space. It is to be hoped that, through establishment of the ad hoc committee suggested by the Secretary of State of the United States [749th meeting), this will lead to the establishment of rules of international law for cosmic space and that discussion of this subject may be kept free of political overtones. In this way constructive progress can be achieved and incalculable difficulties avoided in the future.
104.	In the matter of real achievements, we have noted with satisfaction the success of the Conference of Experts to Study the Possibility of Detecting Violations of a Possible Agreement on the Suspension of Nuclear Tests, which was held in Geneva last summer. The eight participating States reached unanimous conclusions which demonstrate how, on a strictly technical level, results have been achieved which will contribute to relieve international political tension. This promises well for the forthcoming negotiations on this important subject.
105.	An agreement such as is envisaged would not only constitute a major step forward in the solution of the great problem of disarmament but would also signify real fulfilment of an imperative demand which humanity makes of the great Powers, not in defence of political interests, or in the name of collective security, or even to save lives, but to safeguard the human stock of future generations, which is perhaps more important than life itself. The report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation [A/38381 reveals frightful facts which give food for serious thought. Experts of both the West and the Communist world have shown the genetic degeneration and the appalling somatic effects which even a tiny amount of radiation may cause. The gravity of this problem makes an immediate agreement on the suspension of nuclear tests essential.
106.	In the name of the people of Ecuador, I appeal to the great Powers to act in the same spirit of cooperation as prevailed at the recent Conference of Experts, and to reduce the present tensions and overcome their political difficulties. We believe it is urgently necessary to give mankind the reassurance that the awful dangers inherent in the uncontrolled use of atomic energy, which would nullify the great benefits scientific progress has to offer, are at an end.
107.	If we find it highly Ironical to compare the tremendous technical advances of our age with the incalculable risks they bring with them, it is no less ironical to compare mankind's sincere desire for peace and the prevailing international tension which is perhaps without precedent in post-war history. In this connexion, we would invite you to reflect upon the fact that in an atomic war no one would emerge the victor, and that therefore if only for pragmatic reason, and no other, it is essential for States to reaffirm their determination to renounce once and for all the use of force as a means of solving international conflicts.
108.	We must express our profound concern at the events in the Far East and, although our position on the substance of the problem has been made clear, we feel it appropriate to add our voice to those which have suggested another attempt to achieve conciliation. In doing so, we are following the policy outlined by Ecuador at the San Francisco Conference where today's President of the Republic of Ecuador, then Minister of Foreign Affairs and head of the delegation of Ecuador, spoke in the following terms: "In the chapter on peaceful settlement of controversies it would seem indispensable that the San Francisco Conference impart all necessary strength to the method of conciliation, because of the flexibility of its application and its psychological efficacy, and trusting the Assembly with the task of approving a statute of regional or continental commissions which, while depending from the Assembly, might exercise conciliation with ample powers in all international divergences of a political character occurring within the respective region or continent." Perhaps it is along these lines that we should look for the right approach to agreements which will reduce international tension.
109.	We cannot of course, overlook the fact that the problem of collective security is broader than the problem of the mere relations between the great Powers. An essential element of any system of collective security is the means of preventing and settling minor conflicts and of rendering aggression Impossible in any part of the world, irrespective of its origin and of the attitude of the great Powers towards any such conflict.
110.	The United Nations has made a significant contribution to the cause of collective security by applying preventive measures in the case of those conflicts which do not permit of immediate solution. The work of the United Nations military observers in Kashmir, on the frontiers of Israel and in Lebanon has been unobtrusive but effective. It is perhaps little known to the general public, but it has nevertheless saved lives and averted greater evils.
111.	A noteworthy trend is developing in the United Nations organs not only to consider the request of any Government that brings a situation or dispute, large or small, to their attention but also to take speedy preventive measures and to send commissions of inquiry to the trouble-spots.
112.	I would remind you in particular of the speed with which the Security Council responded to Lebanon's appeal in June 1958 and the neat way in which the Secretary-General established a large group of military observers. These have, of course, been working under adverse conditions; but we hope that before long they will have re-established completely the authority of the international Organization in that part of the world.
113.	A collective security system must of course have the moral authority deriving from a genuine desire on the part of States to help to make it work; but it must also have the means to enable it to take practical action when the circumstances of a dispute so require. We therefore await with keen interest the Secretary- General's report on the future application on a less restricted scale of his valuable experience with the United Nations Emergency Force. Statements made in the course of this debate indicate the complexity and importance of the problem and the way in which it is brought up with the political climate of the time.
114.	I should like also to make mention of the Organization's economic and social responsibilities. It is impossible to ignore the fact that people throughout the world have become aware that the rights which they enjoy in the political field should also extend into the economic and social fields. The growing interdependence of States has given rise to serious problems because of the fact that some, economies are highly developed while others lack the means to utilize their natural resources to the full. Just as the tendency in democratic countries is to recognize the equality of the individuals in every aspect of life, so this tendency should be carried over into international affairs, and the political problems of the future can be solved only In the light of this economic principle.
115.	We therefore believe that action to eliminate under-development and poverty is as urgent as action to avoid armed aggression. We are faced with an imperative and urgent duty to show the peoples of the world that the harassing material problems confronting them can be solved in an atmosphere of liberty, peace and economic and social justice. In this connexion I am particularly pleased to note the efforts that are being made on the American continent. These efforts were given a new and most encouraging fillip at the Conference of Foreign Ministers held at Washington on 23 and 24 September 1958.
116.	It must be recognized that the international organizations have not been without their effectiveness in promoting the economic and social development of the under-developed countries. I shall refer to certain basic elements of this problem — technical assistance, common markets, financing, and equity in international trade relations.
117.	The plans worked out within the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance have in certain cases made it possible for Governments to achieve results that they could not have achieved alone, while the work of the regional commissions has co-ordinated regional and world economic interests and the studies made by these commissions have opened the eyes of Governments to realities of which they were previously unaware. Technical assistance has also played an essential role in securing adequate financing for the programmes. It is desirable that it should continue to enjoy the support of Member States and earn their confidence by operating in a creative and flexible manner, establishing priorities in accordance with the needs of each State, avoiding entanglement in red tape and steering clear of any attempt to make the situation in any given country fit the needs of the international machinery. 
118.	The Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA) has taken laudable steps to setup one or more Latin American regional markets. The economic development of the countries of Latin America depends essentially on the modernization of agriculture and gradual industrialization. But the limitations implicit in twenty separate markets constitute a fundamental obstacle in both cases. The studies undertaken by ECLA are a valuable guide to Governments and we feel that the steps it has taken towards the integration of the economies of the Latin American countries are in the right direction, for without losing sight of the need to achieve a single market one day, ECLA recognizes that inevitably, the process may be long, and the pace slow, and that precipitate integration might produce more upheavals than advantages in still shaky economies. The steps being taken maintain the necessary co-operation with similar efforts being made in other parts of the world.
119.	In this connexion, I am pleased to be able to say that for the past twenty-five years Ecuador has been advocating the formation of a Latin American common market and that it supported the first regional effort in 1948 by signing, along with Venezuela, Colombia and Panama, an instrument known as the Quito Charter, which was designed to set up an economic and customs union binding the four countries on the basis of regional preferences already accepted by various friendly European and American countries.
120.	With regard to financing, some progress has been made through the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. We believe that in the light of this progress it would be in the interests of Member States to support the idea of an increase in the Bank's capital. The Bank has had a healthy influence on economic development and it could render even greater services in the future if its resources were increased sufficiently and if, in its relations with Governments, it remained faithful to its policy of constantly reviewing its activities so as to keep them in line with the constantly changing situation of each country.
121.	Similarly, we believe that the capital of the International Monetary Fund should be increased. This organization has already been successful in staving off crises in several countries and has done much to maintain monetary stability. The Second Committee will once again be considering the establishment of the Special Fund. The Ecuadorian delegation will support this project and hopes that the current year will see this important project in operation.
122.	In the broad field of international trade relations the establishment of an equitable adjustment of prices is of vital importance. In the primary producing countries, a decline in the price of primary commodities without a corresponding decline in the price of imported manufactured products, and the absence of stable prices may wreck all efforts at economic development.
123.	In order to achieve this adjustment between the prices of raw and manufactured products Ecuador proposed at the very first session of the General Assembly that the problem should be studied by the United Nations with a view to finding a just and satisfactory solution. I seem to recall that then, just as at later sessions, there was almost universal agreement on this point.
124.	It is essential and urgent that the United Nations should keep up its efforts with a view to some system which will lead to the desired results and thus help not only the under-developed countries but also the highly industrialized countries, which are bound to profit from a rise in the purchasing power of the underdeveloped countries.
125.	Before leaving this rostrum I should like to draw attention to some of the ways in which the recent United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has contributed to the progressive development of international law.
126.	First, I should like to mention the recognition of the special right of coastal States to take measures to conserve the living resources of the sea adjacent to their territorial waters. This right has been proclaimed by various Governments, including my own, and at Geneva it was generally recognized by the international community. Although recognition was incorporated in an unrealistic system which is not calculated to establish a just relationship between States at different levels of economic and technical development, the progress made towards meeting the views of coastal States was welcomed by countries like Ecuador, which see in the living resources of their seas an important source of wealth for their economic future,
127.	A second important contribution made by the Conference was the recognition of the progress made in contemporary law with respect to the sovereignty of the State over the continental shelf.
128.	Thirdly, there was the rapprochement of views on the breadth of the territorial sea and the dynamic approach to this thorny problem, as indicated by the fact that even the proposals put forward by States whose laws still maintain the three-mile principle recognized the exclusive right of the coastal State to the fishing within a twelve-mile zone.
129.	Ecuador wishes to reaffirm its faith that the peace which this Organization is called upon to maintain and strengthen will one day become a universal and permanent reality, a constructive peace based on relations of law and justice among nations and among nations and among the individuals within nations. If this peace is to be a just peace, it must envisage the need for economic co-operation on a large scale to raise the level of living of the majority of mankind and enable them to live free from fear and poverty and to enjoy the advantages of freedom, respect for human rights and true democracy.
130. Finally, we hope that the medium and small Powers will co-operate more and more actively to solve the world's problems within this Organization; they can no longer continue to be mere spectators of events which could lead to great tragedies for mankind.