1.	On behalf of the delegation of Ghana, I bring to the General Assembly cordial greetings from the Government and people of Ghana.
2. I also wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on  your election to the high office of President of this session of the General Assembly. We hope that, under your wise guidance, the deliberations of this Assembly will be conducted in a spirit of goodwill, mutual confidence and understanding, to the benefit of all the peoples of the world community.
3. Today, perhaps more than ever before, the nations of the world are confronted with many complex problems which threaten the very existence of mankind. A lasting solution of these problems will demand of us a complete change in our traditional attitudes and the reorganization of our thinking habits. It will also demand of us development of friendly relations and neighbourly feeling between the nations of the world. The Government of Ghana believes that the United Nations should become an effective medium for the promotion of such friendly relations and neighbourly feeling between all nations and all peoples.
4. As the Prime Minister of Ghana, Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, recently stated in Parliament, "the basis of our foreign policy must be seen against the background of the following considerations, namely: Ghana in her relation to the United Nations, the Commonwealth, the African continent, and the continued economic and social progress of our people".
5. Ghana will continue to co-operate fully with the United Nations and its specialized agencies and will work together with all other nations to make the United Nations a useful and effective instrument for the preservation of international peace and security. Ghana has a vested interest in peace. It is only when there is peace in Africa, land in the world as a whole, that we can have the opportunity to continue, without interruption, with the work of economic and social reconstruction of our country, and of providing high standards of living for our people.
6.	Ghana values its association with the other nations of the Commonwealth because we believe  that the Commonwealth is an instrument which can work for peace and international co-operation. It provides a common forum in which peoples with different backgrounds, different cultures, and different approaches in their outlook can meet together in friendship and on a basis of equality to discuss problems of economic and social well-being for the mutual benefit of all its members.
7.	In his recent foreign policy speech in our Parliament, to which I have referred, the Prime Minister of Ghana made reference to the policy of Ghana in relation to the continent of Africa. There is a growing body of opinion in one part of Africa, and in some quarters outside Africa, that Ghana is becoming the centre of anti-colonial forces and political agitation for independence. The enemies of freedom and independence for the African people view this nationalistic development with alarm. Ghana has no apologies to render in this regard, nor have we any excuses to make. Ghana has made no secret of the fact that it rejects colonial status for any part of Africa, and that we desire to see all Africa free and independent.
8.	The overwhelming majority of the population of Africa are indigenous Africans. Even in those countries with considerable European settlements, such as the Rhodesias and other parts of East Africa, over 90 per cent of tire people are indigenous Africans. When we call for an end to colonialism, therefore, we are doing no more than stating our belief and our firm conviction that the fact of a vast African majority should be accepted as the only basis of government in-Africa.
9.	Minorities naturally fear majority rule, and we believe that safeguards and guarantees of minority rights are needed in Africa, just as they are needed in other parts of the world. The Africans are themselves conscious of the fact that denial of safeguards and guarantees of minority rights will bring about difficulties that may affect their own economic and social progress. However, this should not be used as an excuse for suppressing majority rights in Africa.
10.	The continent of Africa is like a question mark amongst the continents. Its geographical formation demonstrates this fact. In the latter part of the nineteenth century, various European powers divided the African continent amongst themselves. The result of this arbitrary partitioning of Africa was that, at the end of the First World War, there were only three independent States on the continent, namely, the Kingdom of Ethiopia, the Republic of Liberia and, of course, the Union of South Africa.
11.	Between the First and Second World Wars, Egypt, which is now part of the United Arab Republic, regained its independence from foreign rule.
12.	From 1945 to 1957, five African States regained their independence and made their appearance on the international scene. These States are: the Republic of Sudan, the Kingdom of Morocco, the United Kingdom of Libya, the Republic of Tunisia and Ghana.
13.	In April of this year, the independent African States met at a conference in Accra. The conference was held in order to provide an opportunity for the African States to exchange views on all aspects of foreign policy, and to develop a common approach to a solution of their common problems with a view to safeguarding their "hard-won independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity".
14.	In regard to the future of dependent territories in Africa, the Conference was convinced "frat a definite date should be set for the attainment of independence by each of the colonial territories, in accordance with the will of the people of the territories and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations".
15.	On the question of racialism, the Conference of Independent African States considered that the practice of racial discrimination and segregation was "evil and inhuman", and was a direct violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Conference condemned  "the practice of racial discrimination and segregation in all its aspects all over the world, especially in the Union of South Africa, in the Central African Federation, in Kenya and in other parts of Africa".
16.	Mr. President, with your permission, I should like to quote, in extenso the Declaration made unanimously by the independent African States at the Accra Conference: "We, the African States assembled here in Accra, in this our first Conference, conscious of our responsibilities to humanity and especially to the peoples of Africa, and desiring to assert our African personality on the side of peace, hereby proclaim and solemnly reaffirm our unswerving loyalty to the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration of the Asian-African Conference held at Bandung. "We further assert and proclaim the unity among ourselves and our solidarity with the dependent peoples' of Africa as well as our friendship with all nations. We resolve to preserve the unity of purpose and action in international affairs which we have forged among ourselves in this historic Conference, and to safeguard our hard-won independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to preserve among. ourselves the fundamental unity of outlook on foreign policy so that a distinctive African personality will play its part in co-operation with other peace-loving nations to further the cause of peace. "We pledge ourselves to apply all our endeavours to avoid being committed to any action which might entangle our countries to the detriment of our interests and freedom; to recognize the right of the African people to independence and self-determination and to take appropriate steps to hasten the realization of this right; and to affirm the right of the Algerian people to independence and self-determination and to exert all possible efforts to hasten the realization of their independence; to uproot forever the evil of racial discrimination in all its forms wherever it may be found; to persuade the great Powers to discontinue the production and testing of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, and to reduce conventional weapons. "Furthermore, mindful of the urgent need to raise the living standards of our peoples by developing to the fullest possible advantage the great and varied resources of our lands, we hereby pledge ourselves to co-ordinate our economic planning through a joint economic effort and to study the economic potentialities, the technical possibilities and related problems existing in our respective States; to promote co-ordinated industrial planning either through our own individual efforts or through co-operation with specialized agencies of the United Nations; to take measures to increase trade among our respective countries by improving communications between them; and to encourage the investment of foreign capital and skills provided they do not compromise the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of our respective States. "Desirous of mobilizing the human resources of our respective countries in furtherance of our social and cultural aspirations, we will endeavour to promote and facilitate, the exchange of teachers, professors, students, exhibitions, educational and cultural and scientific material which will Improve cultural relations between the African States, and to inculcate greater knowledge amongst us through such efforts as joint youth festivals, sporting events, etc.; we will encourage and strengthen studies of African culture, history and geography in the institutions of learning in the African States; and we will take all measures in our respective countries to ensure that such studies are correctly orientated. "We have charged our Permanent Representatives at the United Nations to be the permanent machinery for co-ordinating all matters of common concern to our countries for examining and making recommendations on concrete and practical steps for implementing our decisions; and for preparing the grounds for future Conferences. "Faithful to the obligations and responsibilities which history has thrown upon us as the vanguard of the complete emancipation of Africa, we do hereby affirm our dedication to the cause which we have proclaimed."
17.	The Government and people of Ghana stand by the resolutions adopted at the Accra Conference by the African States and uphold the principles enunciated in the Declaration I have just referred to. We trust that all people of goodwill will co-operate with the African States to ensure that these common ideals and objectives are implemented for the mutual benefit of all our peoples.
18.	For several years the question of South West Africa as a Trust Territory has been discussed in the United Nations. It is unfortunate that the issue has not yet been resolved as a result of the attitude that the Government of the Union of South Africa had taken in the past.
19.	The Government of Ghana is, therefore, happy that the General Assembly of the United Nations last year appointed a Good Offices Committee charged with responsibility "to discuss with the Government of the Union of South Africa a basis for an agreement which would continue to accord to the Territory of South West ‘Africa an international status" [resolution 1148. (XII)]. The Committee has submitted a report to the General Assembly and the representatives may have an opportunity to discuss the report at a later stage in our proceedings.
20.	The Government of Ghana associates itself with any efforts that are being made to arrive at a peaceful settlement in this important matter and is prepared to support such efforts in every possible way.
21.	However, I wish to say at this stage that my delegation will not associate itself with any proposition for the settlement of the question of South West Africa which aims at dividing the Territory, against the will of the inhabitants, with a view to incorporating part of it into the Union of South Africa.
22.	It is encouraging to observe that the Government of the Union of South Africa has now accepted the fact that the status of the Trust Territory of South West Africa is an international one. We are happy in the knowledge that at least a basis of understanding can now be reached from which further negotiations can usefully proceed in the settlement of this important matter.
23.	My delegation would wish to suggest that the time has come when the United Nations may approach a solution of this problem through the medium of a plebiscite or referendum under United Nations trusteeship. This is the only effective, practicable and unerring method known to democracy for ascertaining  the wishes and aspirations of a people. The people of South West Africa, should be given an opportunity to decide what their future shall be. This Isa suggestion with which, we believe, all Members of the United Nations will agree.
24.	The Government of Ghana is anxious that an early solution should be found to the Algerian question, and that the right of the Algerian people to independence and self-determination should be recognized. At the Conference of the Independent African States held in Accra in April this year, the independent African States' unanimously adopted the following resolution on the question of Algeria: "The Conference of Independent African States. "Deeply concerned by the continuance of war in Algeria and the denial by France to the Algerian people of the right of independence and self-determination despite various United Nations resolutions and appeals urging a peaceful settlement, notably the offers of good offices made by the Moroccan and Tunisian Heads of State, "Considering that the present situation in Algeria constitutes a serious threat to international peace and the security of Africa in particular, ”1. Recognizes the right of the Algerian people to independence and self-determination; "2. Deplores the grave extent of hostilities .and bloodshed resulting from the continuance of the war in Algeria; "3. Urges France "(a) To recognize the right of the people of Algeria to independence and self-determination; "(b) To put an end to hostilities and withdraw the French troops from Algeria; "(c) To enter into immediate peaceful negotiation with the Algerian National Liberation Front with a view to reaching a final and just settlement; "4. Appeals to all peace-loving nations to exercise pressure on France to adopt a policy which is in conformity with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations; "5. Appeals to the friends and allies of France to refrain from helping France, whether directly or indirectly, in her military operations in Algeria; "6. Affirms its determination to make every possible effort to help the Algerian people towards the attainment of independence."
25.	In furtherance of this resolution, Ghana is cooperating, and will continue to co-operate, with the other African States in finding ways and means to enlighten world opinion on the Algerian situation, including the appointment of missions to tour the capitals of the world and to enlist the support of Governments for a just and peaceful settlement of the Algerian question.
26.	Representatives, will recall the appropriate and significant advice given to France last year by the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Ireland, at the twelfth session of the General Assembly, when he said: "France is often urged to liberate Algeria; it is even more important that France should liberate herself from Algeria" [682nd meeting, para. 35]. And may I be permitted to add further, that France should liberate itself not only from Algeria, but also from its self imposed responsibilities everywhere on the continent of Africa. My delegation strongly commends this friendly and neighbourly advice, not only to France, but also to all the colonial Powers on the continent of Africa.
27.	The Government of Ghana is happy that the United Nations Commissioner appointed to supervise the recent elections in Togoland under French Administration has performed his work efficiently and impartially. The Commissioner has submitted a report to the General Assembly which will also be discussed by. the representatives at a later stage in our proceedings.
28.	In the view of my Government, and in conformity with the principles of independence, and self-determination, the people of French Togoland should, at the appropriate opportunity, be given the chance to determine their future status through a plebiscite or referendum, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and, of course, under United Nations supervision. This approach is a suggestion with which, we believe, all Members of the United Nations will agree. We hope France will agree in its own interest. My delegation reserves its right to develop its views on this matter at the appropriate time.
29.	The Government of Ghana is anxious that an early solution of the present situation in the Middle East should be found, within the framework of the United Nations, which is acceptable to all the peoples of the Middle East.
30.	After a political settlement has been achieved, we believe that it will still be necessary to formulate plans for economic reconstruction and development in the Middle East, perhaps along the lines suggested at the third emergency special session by the Secretary-General of the United Nations [732nd meeting] and the President of the United States [733rd meeting], should the people of the Middle East themselves so desire.
31.	My Government views with grave concern the present unsettled situation in the Far East.
32.	In the view of my delegation, an important aspect of the matter, which perhaps may lead eventually to a lasting; settlement in the Far East, is the admission of the People's Republic of China to membership of the United Nations. In our view, the admission Of the People's Republic of China would conduce to the lessening of tension in contemporary international relations and would also contribute to ensuring the foundations of peace and security not only in the Far East but throughout the world.
33.	Last year, the delegation of Ghana took part in the preliminary discussions which eventually resulted in the establishment by the General Assembly of a regional Economic Commission for Africa [resolution 1155 (XII). The Government of Ghana will cooperate with the other African States and with all other nations to make the work of the Commission a success to the mutual benefit of the African peoples.
34.	We are aware of a section of opinion outside Africa which, even at this stage, is still not happy about the establishment of the regional Economic Commission for Africa by reason of certain particular economic interests which it may still wish to pursue on the continent of Africa. However, my delegation would like to say that, in our view, there is no cause for apprehension.
35.	We hope that all Members of the United Nations that have interests in Africa and that have a trust to discharge on our continent will co-operate fully in the activities of the regional Economic Commission for Africa in order to ensure its success to the benefit of the African people.
36.	In the view of my Government, it is a sad reflection of our time that vast sums of money are being spent by the great Powers on the manufacture of weapons of destruction, especially nuclear and thermonuclear weapons. These vast sums of money could have been better spent on enterprises which would help to raise the standard of living of the peoples of the world and to eradicate poverty, illiteracy, disease, ignorance and squalor from human society.
37.	We call upon the great Powers, especially the United States and the Soviet Union, to agree among themselves on the question of disarmament and to put a stop to nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests aimed at the destruction of human life. We must all learn to live together and work together to develop the arts of peace and not the arts of war.
38.	In Africa today, we are alarmed by the report that France intends to conduct atomic tests in the Sahara desert. We vehemently protest against this idea and we invite the United Nations and the conscience of the world to dissuade France from carrying out such atomic tests in the Sahara desert or in any other part of Africa.
39.	Last year I indicated the basic principles underlying the foreign policy of my Government in the conduct of our relations with other States. Ghana desires to pursue a policy of peace, friendship and neighbourliness with all nations. We desire to cultivate and maintain friendly relations with all nations, wherever possible, and to be enemy to none.
40.	We believe that man is not the enemy of man and that the causes which impel man to destroy his fellow man can be eradicated when there is goodwill, neighbourly feeling and mutual respect for the dignity of the human person.
41.	We believe that the real enemies of mankind are poverty, ignorance, disease, illiteracy and squalor, In this regard, the Prime Minister of Ghana, Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, has clearly stated that he would like the rest of the world to judge us in Ghana and assess our achievements on the basis of the extent to which we are able to provide high standards of living for our people. In a recent statement Dr. Nkrumah said: "The first objective of my Government is to abolish from Ghana poverty, ignorance, disease and illiteracy. We shall measure our progress by the improvement in the health of our people; by the number of children in schools and by the quality of their education; by the availability of water and electricity in our towns and villages; and by the happiness which our people take in being able to manage their own affairs. The welfare of our people is our chief pride, and it is by this that my Government will ask to be judged."
42.	The delegation of Ghana would wish to suggest that, in the course of our deliberations, all Members of the United Nations must concentrate their efforts on finding a medium whereby the discoveries of science, and the knowledge that we have acquired in our technological advancement, could be used for the betterment of human life throughout the world.
43.	This, we believe, is the greatest challenge in our time. The Government of Ghana will continue to co-operate with the United Nations in our common effort to establish a world fellowship of peace.