1.	First of all, Mr. President, allow me to express to you our deeply felt congratulations on your election. The choice of the Assembly signifies a recognition, with which I associate myself, of your work during the past years in our Organization as well as a testimony of our trust in your ability to direct our work.
2.	When, on 21 August 1958, the General Assembly, at its third emergency special session, unanimously adopted the resolution submitted the day before by ten Arab States here represented [resolution 1237 (ES-III)], all of us were inspired by feelings of faith and hope, However serious the crisis that had developed in the Near East, however important the interests involved and the contrasts between the various tendencies, it was quite clear that a sense of deep responsibility prevailed in each Government, thus reducing the immediate menace of increasing tension in that region, We derived hope also from the fact that it was possible to reach an initial agreement within the framework of the United Nations and on the basis of the principles of our Charter.
3.	We feel that this agreement was and still is of remarkable importance. On the one hand, it was inspired by a series of principles which constitute the basis of all effective possibilities for nations to foster and maintain good neighbourly relations. On the other hand, this agreement contains the fundamental and essential concept of co-operation among the countries of the Near East which are legitimately seeking a solution to their problems. In reaching this agreement, not only did we avoid increasing tension, but we accomplished something more; we showed a constructive element that fully justifies the hopeful expectancy that the Arab States, in a spirit of good will and mutual understanding, will implement the resolution unanimously adopted, thus fulfilling their duty to act as the free masters of their own destiny.
4.	But, over and above this, it is evident that a new page and better understanding has been shown of the need for the normal, peaceful development of those countries which are still too far from being able to maintain a sufficiently high level of prosperity. Equally, we have sensed a liberal and prompt willingness on the part of those Governments which dispose of more means to make a common effort, within the peaceful framework of respect for international law, to help peoples of the Near East to fulfil their aspirations.
5.	Does this mean perhaps that all the most important problems of the Near East may be considered solved and that all our anxieties should disappear? Certainly not. However, we have succeeded in our search for a sound approach, and the next step is to proceed on the right road.
6.	In this slow and arduous task we know that we can rely on the sound and tireless action of the Secretary-General. We are awaiting the report which he is to submit in fulfilment of the mandate conferred upon him by the General Assembly. His absolute dedication to the cause of peace and his well-known qualities afford us the utmost hope and constitute a guarantee in this respect.
7.	 Considering the situation from a general point of view, I should like to express here my firm conviction that if we are able to analyse and evaluate adequately the causes and the spirit which resulted in the recent positive experience of our common work, we shall find therein guidance to lead us towards desirable and constructive solutions, responding not only to the interest of the people in that particular area of the world, but also to the expectations of mankind, anxious to safeguard peace with justice and freedom.
8.	How could it be denied that we are all aware of the imperative commandment to spare our peoples the danger of a conflict which would totally destroy the existence of everyone and from which no victor, but only losers, would emerge?
9.	Fortunately, a widespread reluctance openly and formally to violate the principles of the Charter is becoming more and more evident.
10.	The ghost of an all-out conflict is not in itself sufficient to assure to all an enduring peace, and, on the other hand, it could be exploited by unscrupulous adventurers to the detriment of those who are anxious. for the survival of our civilization. The principles of independence, non-interference in internal affairs and territorial integrity, sanctioned by our Charter, could be defied; indeed, in the past we have Witnessed a serious 'crisis caused by aggression in the Far East, and today we see there a defiance of these supreme obligations.
11.	On the other hand, understanding of certain natural needs of peaceful development in those countries which are still far from having achieved an adequate standard o! living, as 'well as readiness to make a common effort to solve their technical and economic problems, require concrete action which will take time, patience, vast means, a great spirit of generosity and an atmosphere of mutual trust that cannot be brought about all of a sudden. A harmonious and constructive effort on behalf of all the States directly interested could also be jeopardized by outbreaks of violence and self-interest.
12.	There are valid reasons why we should more and more engage our sense of responsibility and our capabilities of appreciating the real terms of such a situation in a determination adequately to develop the United Nations. We should provide the means of controlling the implementation of obligations solemnly entered into and we should also provide appropriate instruments to cope with certain immediate economic and technical assistance requirements. Only in this way shall we be able further to consolidate those factors which have given rise to our recent political experience to a point where they will acquire a truly effective and lasting aspect. These are the aims of the Italian Government and my delegation will seek their attainment during the course of this session of the General Assembly.
13.	I have stated this with the intention of clarifying and strengthening certain general principles. However, I now wish to identify those fields in which we may more usefully concentrate our immediate efforts. In this connexion, I do not hesitate to state that the Italian Government maintains that in striving gradually to overcome the most urgent political problems, it is also necessary to strengthen and develop the activity of the United Nations not only in the political field but also in the economic and social fields. It does not appear possible to separate the solution of economic problems from the solution of political problems. Whoever might indulge in such an attempt would undoubtedly become engaged in a fruitless effort, for these two aspects are inseparable; they are facets which complement and support each other. An error of this type should be avoided.
14.	We should also take into account what happens within our own countries. It is in fact a feature of the policy of modern States to engage in efforts aimed at creating ties of solidarity within their territory. The principle of social welfare has been taken almost everywhere as the basis for intervention on the part of a government to a point where the entire economy is no longer conceived as a simple means of enrichment but as a means of strengthening, increasing and distributing wealth. It is in this sense that modern States conceive of freedom, which is not only political freedom but also freedom from material needs within the framework of the economic structure of the country. We have thus passed through various stages of history which have taken us from simple political freedom to the co-operation of the entire population. A similar situation and similar needs exist on an international level.
15. In the same way as we now care for poverty and unemployment on the domestic level, we cannot remain indifferent to certain elementary needs on the international level. There are too many people in the world who are in a state of general poverty, which is inconsistent with the progress of modern technology. The concept of political independence must be made complete by the adequate development of the economic life of our countries if we really wish to be members of one large family.
16.	All this is quite clear to Italian statesmen, Italy, which in the past offered its memorable contribution to the enunciation and implementation of the principle of nationality; Italy, which acquired independence by a difficult struggle and which is now engaged in a strenuous effort to ensure an equitable distribution of wealth among its citizens — Italy, of course, understands these aspirations for political independence which are expressed with peaceful intentions in the desire to abide by international law, especially today when the community of nations is organized within the framework of the United Nations. Italy especially understands full well certain legitimate yearnings to combat the unhappy heritage of collective poverty, yearnings which appear more actively in under-developed areas.
17.	Only a few days ago, in a joint statement in Sao Paulo, the President of the Republic of Italy and the President of Brazil reaffirmed “... the right of all peoples to their independence and to mutual respect for their legitimate aspirations; the right to enjoy civil liberties which are at once the condition and the expression of the dignity of man; the demands of justice requiring a more equitable distribution of wealth and a higher and more adequate standard of living for the masses." They stressed that “... these principles are the basic premises of an effective democracy and of peaceful international relations, since they impose an integrated policy of social progress upon every nation in its internal affairs, and a policy of co-operation and solidarity of the wealthier and stronger nations towards those nations which have not yet achieved a level of development in accordance with the basic needs of the populations."
18.	I wish today in this Assembly to renew this solemn appeal in the name of my Government, in view of the development of the activity of the United Nations in the economic and social sphere and in the field of technical assistance. We must make the utmost effort in order that our Organization may become more and more an effective instrument at the disposal of all men of good will serving to safeguard the present generations and to prepare a brighter future for the coming ones.
19.	We must look with faith to the future because the evolution we hope for is fully in keeping with the evolution of modern techniques. The progress of science is discovering new means heretofore unthinkable, means which will enable us to solve all problems of a material character. International conflicts, just as the problems of poverty, disease, and all the plagues through which mankind has struggled for thousands of years, can be overcome by means of technical progress that affords to all peoples the hope of a brighter future to come. But we must want this with determination because technical and scientific progress by itself, if not utilized in the right direction, may very well lead to the most abominable of catastrophes and to the most horrendous of failures.
20.	On the other hand, peace is not and cannot be a merely negative concept, in other words, it cannot be conceived only as the absence of conflict. Peace must be envisaged us a positive action, and this is precisely the reason which prompts me to insist that the United Nations should create instruments of international coloration in all fields and that the United Nations should look far ahead to the new world that is in the making, to the new roads that are opening up before us, to new forms of co-operation to which I intend to refer later on in my statement,
21.	As far as my country is concerned, I am glad to inform the Assembly that at the proper time the Italian delegation will announce the decision of the Italian Government to increase considerably its contribution to the yearly programme of technical assistance and to contribute to the Special Fund for underdeveloped countries. While this decision is only a few days old, my Government's decision to continue its assistance to Somaliland after the end of the Italian administration — an administration which to this date has already brought considerable progress to that Territory — shows that we are resolved to prepare the Territory for full independence. On the other hand, as is well known, the Italian Government has already favourably considered the possibility of participating fully in the international economic assistance to be extended through the planned economic organization for the Near East. We will be happy to do so, especially because that organization will be based on the free co-operation of the countries of that area. Italy is certainly not a rich country and therefore, owing to the magnitude of similar problems with which we are coping in our own territory, our contribution will not reach exceptionally large figures. However, I can assure you that we shall accomplish a considerable effort and that our contribution to this cause, which we so fully understand, will not be a purely symbolic one.
22. From several sides, proposals have been advanced about the possibility of utilizing for economic assistance a share of the savings to be realized eventually through disarmament. This is certainly an interesting idea. However, under the present circumstances, I feel that it might be more realistic to start the development of the economic and social activities already existing or under study, without awaiting a preliminary solution of the problem of disarmament.
23.	On the other hand, in the light of what I have said so far, and also considering the positive result of our recent experiences, as I already mentioned in my speech at the third emergency special session [739th meeting], we feel that the idea of creating a permanent United Nations force for possible emergency cases should be seriously considered. This idea seems to have caused some alarm in certain delegations. I must confess that I do not see the reason for such alarm. In fact, it is not a question of creating an actual army but rather of profiting by past experience and avoiding hasty decisions. Clearly, the use of this force, of which we would merely draft the blueprints and the composition, would have to be planned in advance, taking into account the respect of the sovereign rights of the individual Member States. In other words, we envisage the creation not of a combat force but of an instrument of observation and control at the disposal of the United Nations. Similarly, the Italian delegation is prepared to support all the other initiatives which the Secretary-General, in fulfilling his. mandate, may deem it necessary to suggest with a view to the effective strengthening of the United Nations Observation Group In Lebanon and in order closely to follow the implementation of the principles of the Charter in the most seriously threatened areas,
24.	Considering now certain main aspects of the question of disarmament, while I reserve the privilege to present the views of my Government on the specific points on the appropriate occasion, I should like to dwell at this time on some general considerations which will guide the action of the Italian delegation.
25.	Firstly, we intend to take a clear stand in favour of every initiative directed towards the utmost exploitation for peaceful purposes of recent discoveries in the nuclear field. We take this stand not only in the awareness of the great benefits that can accrue to humanity from technical progress, but realistically because it also takes into account the fact that every development in the peaceful use of nuclear energy will automatically divert from military uses a substantial proportion of the limited means which are available to individual Governments for this purpose. In the same way, we intend to offer our willing contribution towards the earliest possible utilization for peaceful purposes of outer space. The idea of creating a special institution for legal and scientific research in this field appears to us of the utmost urgency, and this Assembly should not conclude its work before adopting a positive resolution in this respect.
26.	The method of separating the technical and scientific aspects from the political facets of nuclear disarmament has already yielded its first positive results in the control of nuclear tests. We cannot but hail these results and hope that the forthcoming conference on surprise attacks will also reach a positive agreement. Decisive steps should be taken in this direction, and the Italian Government is not only in favour of such initiatives, but is also prepared to offer its support and collaboration to this end. Atomic disarmament, if completed with legitimate safeguards in matters of control and with similar provisions in other fields of armaments, meets with our full approval. On the other hand, the Italian Government wishes to affirm its willingness in principle to permit the establishment of more effective controls on its own territory to the extent that the principle of reciprocity is adopted in this respect. However, my delegation is of the opinion that the General Assembly of the United Nations should affirm the principle that it is fully aware of the crucial importance to mankind of the study of, and of further decisions on, the question of atomic radiation. The responsibility of facing these problems lies on all the States Members of the United Nations, and not merely on a restricted club.
27.	If it is recognized that the question of nuclear disarmament deserves special attention, the Italian delegation nevertheless maintains that the importance of the question of disarmament in the field of conventional weapons should not be underestimated, if for no other reason than that conventional weapons are the only type available to the great majority of the countries represented in this Assembly. We believe the present juncture affords a unique historical occasion in this respect due to the decreasing importance of conventional armaments for the major military Powers. We should not forego this unique opportunity. Considering the possibility of reaching agreement on separating the technical and scientific aspects of the problem from the political ones, I wonder whether it would not prove useful to apply the same method to disarmament in the field of conventional weapons, clearing the ground of the technical problems relating to controls through a special conference of experts.
28.	The problem of disarmament, being one to which public opinion is highly sensitive, constitutes one of the main themes of propaganda from the communist camp. In concluding my general remarks on this question, I cannot but recall the attitude of obstruction held by the Soviet Union towards the United Nations Disarmament Commission during 1958. This is a case of open challenge to the decisions of the General Assembly and it seems peculiar that it should come precisely from the Government which ceaselessly declares its intention to disarm. The United Nations is competent for the solution of this problem and it is scarcely through a boycott of its lawful bodies and of their activity that progress can be achieved towards reaching an agreement which is the aspiration of us all.
29.	But there is more to it. Whereas the democratic and parliamentary systems prevailing in the majority of Member States make it possible to follow in full view all measures, both military and financial, that are taken by each Government with the prior approval of the respective Parliaments, a thick veil of mystery clouds all that is happening in this field in the communist world. We might wonder whether it is really possible to deal effectively through uniform measures with this complicated and delicate matter, bearing on the very problem of national security and survival, as long as such a disparity of situations continues to exist.
30.	Although I have tried so far to emphasize those aspects of our activities which offer a positive picture of . our efforts — one which it is our responsibility to develop and to strengthen even further — I must recall other, negative, circumstances which cloud today's political horizon.	
31.	The problem of German reunification, which is so vital for a lasting order in Europe, remains unsolved, although all evidence points to the fact that its solution would indeed facilitate that of other serious questions such as security and disarmament.
32.	I cannot refrain from pointing out that no positive course has followed the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly in 1956 and 1957 with respect to Hungary. While I reserve my right to return to this point at the appropriate time, I should like to stress now that the Charter of the United Nations would have no more meaning if we passively accepted such flagrant Violations. This challenge to our Organization must cease and must be eliminated once and for all.
33.	What is happening in the Far East at this time is no less a cause of worry to us. We reserve our right to intervene in. the debate if and when this question should be discussed during this session of the Assembly. However, something should be said now concerning the serious danger arising from the use of force. In this respect it is perfectly useless to appeal to rights and to invoke pretexts; whatever their foundation, the use of force is in no case admissible. The confusion between rights — or presumed rights — and their exercise has been long since overcome within every State, and to go back to such positions would plunge us all into a state of complete anarchy, similarly, the recourse to the principle of self-protection would present a serious set-back in international relations.
34.	The United Nations was created precisely for the purpose of ensuring to the international community a legal order aiming at banning the use of force as a means of national policy. Any effort, however strong, towards an equitable solution of economic and social problems would be absolutely useless if the United Nations did not assure peace to mankind. And peace will not be assured as long as the use of force by individual States is permitted and as long as the decisions of the General Assembly are openly flouted.
35.	We are firmly resolved to work together to assure to all peoples the satisfaction of their most urgent needs and to free them from the scourge of hunger and poverty. Our determination to defend the paramount gift of peace in freedom and legality is stronger than ever. We have entrusted this important task to the United Nations. The United Nations must discourage the enemies of peace once and for all. The place of Italy is amongst those who fight for the implementation of die provisions and the principles of the Charter. And we do not consider these principles as mere words to which lip service should be given from time to time, but rather as an imperative rule of behaviour by which to abide to the peaceful development of' relations between the peoples of the world.