88.	I am glad to express at the outset my sincere congratulations to Mr. Charles Malik, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, on his election as President of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly. I am confident that, with his great knowledge and rich experience in the United Nations, our new President will fully carry out the heavy responsibilities he has assumed.
89. At the same time, I wish to express the satisfaction and appreciation of my delegation to Sir Leslie Munro of New Zealand. As President of the twelfth session of the General Assembly and of the third emergency special session, he has fulfilled his heavy responsibilities with great tact and efficiency. It is my earnest hope that, whatever the field of endeavour he may enter in the future, he will continue to work in the interests of world peace and international understanding.
90.	Respect for the principles and purposes of the United Nations has consistently been the basis of my country’s foreign policy. In line with this basic policy, we have on every occasion contributed our efforts to strengthening the United Nations and to raising its prestige and authority. In their strong aspirations for peace, the people of my country fully support these efforts. It is my Government’s resolve to continue them.
91.	At the opening of the thirteenth so scion of the General Assembly, I should like to present the basic views of my delegation on some of the problems confronting the United Nations.
92.	A most urgent problem facing the world today is tire present situation in the Taiwan Strait. It is a disturbing situation over which we cannot but entertain grave apprehension and concern, for any serious development In the area affects us by reason of our geographical propinquity.
93.	The parties immediately concerned may stand on different positions and have different views on the issues involved, but this is natural in the light of the historical background of these Issues. However, quite apart from whether these views are justified or not, we should not under any circumstances, condone the use of force as a means of settlement, for appeal to arms poses every danger of provoking a major world conflict.
94.	It is urgent and essential that the situation in the Taiwan Strait be settled peacefully. I therefore welcome the efforts that are now being made at the Warsaw talks, which began only a few days ago, to seek a peaceful means of settlement. It is Japan's hope and expectation that both parties will refrain from the use of force and seek a reasonable settlement such as would ensure future stability and peace in the area.
95.	I welcome the Warsaw talks because I believe that efforts to settle disputes by negotiation should first be made by the parties concerned and that only in the event that such efforts failed should the United Nations be called upon to take them up. In view of the fact that talks are now in progress at Warsaw between the parties concerned, we should, in discussing the situation in the Taiwan Strait here in the United Nations, exercise care and restraint so as not to jeopardize those talks. For this reason, I should like to confine my remarks for the present to what I have said. But because we are seriously concerned over the situation by reason of our geographical location, the Japanese Government reserves the opportunity to express its view in the future should the situation become an issue in the United Nations.
96.	At the Twelfth session, I pointed out in this Assembly that the common aspirations of the peoples of Asia and Africa are to secure their national independence and to achieve economic and social progress so as to ensure their political independence [680th meeting, para. 85). As a member of the Asian community of nations, the people of Japan wish again to express their wholehearted sympathy for the efforts of those peoples to build a bright future for themselves in the face of many difficulties. At the same time, I hope that all countries will regard the legitimate aspirations of these peoples with friendly understanding and give them full support and cooperation in the fulfilment of their aspirations. The aspirations of peoples to consolidate their national Independence and to achieve economic and social progress will surely be attained as an inevitable development of history. Hence, it is our hope that peoples who are now in the process of achieving political and economic independence will, on-their part, avoid narrow-minded thinking and extreme actions and, with confidence in their future, steadily consolidate and strengthen their independence in a spirit of fairness and moderation.
97.	I believe it was most significant that a constructive resolution on the Middle East problem (General Assembly resolution 1237 (ES-III)), initiated by the Arab countries themselves, was unanimously adopted at the third emergency special session thanks to an attitude of understanding shown by all the Members of the United Nations. Our high respect is particularly due to the Arab countries for their demonstration of the spirit of mutual concession and. compromise which served to inspire such a means of settlement.
98.	At the same time, I must express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Hammarskjold, for his continued dedicated efforts to carry out the purposes of the resolution. The Japanese delegation, together with other delegations, eagerly looks forward to the report which the Secretary-General is expected shortly to make to us. We earnestly hope that, through the efforts made by the Secretary-General, the way will be opened to ensure peace and stability in Lebanon and Jordan and thereby facilitate the withdrawal of United States and United Kingdom forces from these countries. Furthermore, there is need for long-term measures to establish peace and stability in the Middle East on a durable basis and, as I said at the recent emergency session, I hope that the Assembly, at its thirteenth session, will give its earnest attention to this point.
99.	I have expressed my views on the problems of peace and stability in various areas of the world. I should now like to touch on the question of suspension of tests of nuclear weapons and on the problem of disarmament as a means to removing the threat of a world war.
100.	At the twelfth session of the General Assembly, my delegation submitted a draft resolution proposing that nuclear .test explosions be suspended and on such a basis that disarmament talks be facilitated [A/Cl/ L.174]. Unfortunately, our draft resolution failed to win the support of the majority. But in the year since then, major changes in the situation have occurred. That is to say, the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom have in turn announced the suspension of nuclear tests and from 31 October 1958 they will enter into negotiations for an agreement on suspension of tests. The, Japanese people and Government have followed these developments with profound gratification.
101.	In view of the unknown injuries that will be brought upon mankind now and in the future by the effects of radiation caused by nuclear tests, as indicated in the report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation [A/3838]. I wish to reiterate the unchanging view of the Japanese Government that an early agreement on the suspension of nuclear tests should have priority and be reached in advance of other disarmament measures. My Government hopes very earnestly that, with such an agreement as a basis, the ultimate objective of permanent suspension of nuclear tests will be attained.
102.	From the standpoint of general disarmament, the suspension of nuclear tests is no more than a first step. The danger of thermo-nuclear war will remain until and unless general disarmament, including the prohibition of the production, stockpiling and use of thermo-nuclear bombs, is effectuated under effective international supervision. It is, therefore, my earnest hope that measures to suspend nuclear tests will be instrumental in creating a greater mutual trust and a peaceful climate between East and West and thereby serve to facilitate negotiations in the general field of disarmament.
103.	In this connexion, we should note the fact that the Conference of Experts to Study the Possibility of Detecting Violations of a Possible Agreement on the Suspension of Nuclear Tests, which met at Geneva in July and August 1958, succeeded in reaching agreement on the technical aspects of a monitoring system. Not only does this make easier the suspension of nuclear tests, but I think it can be said that the experience of these experts suggests the possibility that similar meetings of experts on supervision and inspection relative to other disarmament measures would also succeed in their endeavours, and it has opened a new approach toward facilitating disarmament negotiations in the future. In other words, if a conference of experts can be called to reach a separate agreement on such aspects of disarmament as, for instance, inspection measures to prevent surprise attack, the future of disarmament negotiations may well become more hopeful.
104.	In this sense, we welcome the report that a meeting of experts of the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union will begin in Geneva on 10 November 1958 to study methods of preventing surprise attack.
105.	I believe you will recall that, during the twelfth session of the General Assembly, and since, the Japanese Government took every opportunity to try to bring about the resumption of the disarmament discussions in the United Nations. These efforts of ours were made out of our deep concern over the fact that disarmament discussions in the United Nations were completely stalemated as a result of the Soviet declaration not to participate in the Disarmament Commission.
106.	Disarmament is again an item on the agenda of the present session. I would like to see a more active and serious study made of this problem by all the Members. It is the desire of my delegation to contribute its full share to such an effort.
107.	Recently the question of creating a United Nations peace force has again come to the fore. It goes without saying that this is a question that requires careful study and discussion. If, fortunately, such a force Is created, not with any specific area in mind but as an organization to serve anywhere in the world, and if it becomes capable of performing its functions, it may well enable individual countries to reduce their arms. At the same time, arms reduction by individual countries may enable them more easily to contribute to the building of the United Nations peace force. In studying the problem of creating this force, I think that consideration should be given to its inter-relationship with the problem of disarmament.
108.	I wish next to refer briefly to a few questions which for some years continue to remain pending in the United Nations.
109.	Although thirteen years have passed since the Second World War, Korea, Viet-Nam and Germany continue to be divided States. In expressing to these countries my deep sense of sympathy, I wish to express my earnest hope that they will soon be unified in peace, and by democratic processes.
110.	Another pending question is the dispute between Indonesia and the Netherlands, which continues to be unresolved. It is desirable that the countries directly concerned should demonstrate their wisdom and patience, and exert every effort to settle their differences peacefully in-a climate of reconciliation.
111.	Still another problem discussed in the United Nations is the problem of Hungary, to which I referred at the twelfth session of the General Assembly [680th meeting, para. 76]. The unfortunate developments that have ensued from the Hungarian incident, especially the tragedy that has already befallen or may soon befall those who were connected with the incident, warn us that the problem of Hungary is not a thing of the past. I believe that it is incumbent upon us to do whatever can be done to rectify the situation in that country.
112.	World economic stability is a basic factor in the maintenance of international peace. But what is the situation today? The growth and development of the world economy is being impeded by dollar shortages, by chronic difficulties in the balance-of-payments positions of many countries and by the creation of artificial trade barriers. The disparity in economic development between the advanced industrial countries and the under-developed countries goes on widening. If this situation is allowed to continue, it may well become a cause for international political instability.
113.	In order to meet such a situation, there is no real solution — as has been stated and restated on many occasions — other than for all countries to meet the challenge squarely and further strengthen their mutual co-operation to the end of liberalizing trade and developing the economies of under-developed countries. While constant efforts should continue to be made to lower or eliminate trade barriers, serious study should be given to removing the causes which hinder freer economic exchange as a result of shortages of convertible currencies.
114.	In connexion with liberalizing international trade, the Japanese Government believes that it is necessary to effect such steps as would promote economic exchanges between the democratic nations and the communist nations, while recognizing the differences in political and economic structure between these two groups of countries.
115.	With regard to the development of the economies of under-developed countries, the efforts made by the Members of the United Nations in past years have borne fruit and the United Nations Special Fund for economic development is shortly to begin to function. This is a welcome development as it signifies a step forward in the effort to promote the economic growth and expansion of under-developed countries. Furthermore, in the Middle East, the establishment of a regional economic development fund of considerable size is being considered by the countries concerned, while in Latin America, I am informed, a similar plan is being pushed forward. The countries concerned should be congratulated for exercising their initiative in bringing about a more active consideration of their plans for regional development.
116.	I must emphasize here that the need to create a fund for regional economic development and for the promotion of economic development plans is as great in South-East Asia as it is in the Middle East and Latin America. It is my earnest hope that by positive co-operation among the countries concerned a fund for regional economic development will be established in South-East Asia at an early date.
117.	In view of the serious blow suffered by the under-developed countries since last year when the prices of primary commodities dropped as a result of the impact of the economic recession, my delegation believes that it is necessary that the advanced industrial countries which are the principal importers of these commodities should change their hitherto passive attitude to a positive one and in earnest revitalize international co-operative efforts to effect long term stabilization of the prices of these primary commodities.
118.	Among our various countries, there are those which suffer from lack of manpower resources. If these countries should make organized efforts to import necessary technology and manpower from countries which have them in abundance, they would be able further to develop and expand their economies. Such efforts would be most desirable from the standpoint of promoting the health of the world's economy as a whole. At the twelfth session of this Assembly, I expressed the hope that the United Nations would serve as an intermediary in solving the problem of population [680th meeting, para. 93]. I would like here to renew the hope that, with the understanding of all countries, these efforts will be made.
119.	There is one final point which I wish to make. It is an undeniable fact that the foremost cause of international tension has been the confrontation between the free world and the communist world, intensified by the expansion of international communism. In order positively to resolve this conflict, not only should the big Powers engage in meaningful talks with each other, but also all Member States should build up the United Nations as an effective arena for discussion and as a body which could co-operate in enabling these talks to achieve results. It is in this role of the United Nations that all mankind, in its yearning for lasting peace, places its high hopes and expectations. For this purpose, all Member States must, in the spirit of the Charter, endeavour to settle constructively and without prejudice all issues brought before the United Nations with tolerance and understanding. It is the intention and resolve of my country to make positive “contributions to the work of this Organization so that it may fulfil such a role and truly become in name and in fact a "world parliament" for the peaceful settlement of all problems.
120.	I have presented the basic views and hopes of my delegation on some of the problems which confront the United Nations. Mr. President, in expressing the hope that this session under your presidency will reap a large measure of success, I wish to give my assurance that the Japanese delegation will contribute its full share toward the fulfilment of this hope.