72.	Mr. President, may I be permitted to express to you the sincere congratulations of the Portuguese delegation on your election — a well- deserved tribute to your personal merits and ability and to your wide experience in the work of this Organization.
73.	I should also like to take this opportunity to recall with grateful admiration the great services rendered by the outgoing President, Sir Leslie Munro, who presided with such diligence, wisdom and distinction over the twelfth session and the third emergency special session of the General Assembly.
74.	Once again, we are meeting in this yearly event, the regular session of the General Assembly. None of us would underrate the importance or doubt the extreme usefulness of such an event. Faced as mankind is today with numerous and most intricate problems, including the supreme problem of its own survival, problems whose complexities and difficulties seem inexorably to increase only to challenge man's ingenuity, it is proper and logical and most necessary that the nations of the world, large and small, should meet together regularly in this forum.
75.	By doing so, we learn more about one another, about one another's history, aspirations, economic possibilities, social structure and institutions. That, by itself, is a tremendous advantage, considering that nations are complex realities and that we all need to know each other well in order to work in common, in the fields in which we are able to work, if we want to solve the problems of our epoch. But, above all, each one of us, representing that overwhelming majority of Governments sincerely seeking the ways of peace and harmony not only for themselves but for others, is only too glad to fulfil here, despite the shortcomings of the Organization, the commitment to debate, conscientiously and selflessly, in accordance with the high purposes and principles of the Charter, all those problems connected with the main aspiration of all the peoples of the world — to see that mankind survives, with the civilization it was able to create, in an ambiance of human solidarity and of peace inspired by justice.
76.	It has already been indicated by previous speakers that, as expected, we are meeting in this session with three main problems in mind — the situation in the Far East, the situation in the Middle East, and the problem of disarmament. They are the paramount problems of the moment, interlinked as they are with peace itself.
77.	It is characteristic of this difficult period through which the world is passing that no sooner have signs of hope appeared on the international horizon in regard to the most immediate problems of the Middle East than dark clouds have again gathered over the Far East, in the Formosa Strait bringing with them a now and most serious crises. For weeks we have witnessed there the dash of deep antagonisms, the expression of mutual threats and die open exercise of violence — now the unfortunate but usual pattern in a world which with good reason fears the atomic holocaust but at the same time, is seemingly unable to restrain itself from actions that might bring about this tragedy.
78.	The Portuguese delegation believes it to be indispensable that this new crisis, like any other, should be faced calmly, and that no efforts should be spared to ensure its peaceful solution. We therefore consider the conversations now taking place in Warsaw to be a step in the right direction. We also consider that, while they are proceeding, they should not be disturbed or interfered with by outsiders. Therefore, it can hardly be the time for us here to enter into a discussion of the merits of the dispute. On the other hand, it can do no harm and it can cause no resentment on die part of those most directly concerned if I state that Portugal, as a Member of the United Nations and as a country which always has the interests of peace at heart, earnestly hopes that an early cease-fire will be established in the area and that die use of force will be entirely discarded in the settlement of the present crisis,
79.	As regards the Middle East, the emergency special session which was convened to deliberate on the serious difficulties which has arisen in that area ended its work only a few weeks ago on a most welcome note of hope and relief, A well-balanced, conciliatory and constructive resolution [1237 (ES-III)]. sponsored by those very countries which were most closely involved in the difficulties, had been unanimously adopted. It was a great and inspiring occasion for this Organization since the resolution sought a United Nations solution — that is, a peaceful solution — was inspired by the most important United Nations principles and was to be implemented in large measure with the assistance of the disinterested efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
80.	My delegation is now awaiting with deep interest and concern — feelings which I am sure are shared by other delegations — the report of the Secretary-General on the difficult mission entrusted to him. It is almost certain that he has met with difficulties, as might have been expected, considering the unavoidable differences of opinion which exist. Then, too, we know that patience and time are always required to resolve any conflict, even when all the parties concerned — as I am certain is the case here — are working within a framework of good faith. However, we confidently hope that we shall hear from the Secretary-General that, even if no definite settlement of die difficulties is immediately at hand, strong foundations have at least been laid or can be laid for providing an early and practical implementation of all the aims of the resolution. With the political situation thus improved, great prospects would be opened up for the economic and social development of the countries of the area, a point mentioned by so many of us in the debate during the third emergency special session. It is therefore of paramount importance for those countries and also for world peace that the high hopes expressed in the General Assembly when it unanimously voted the resolution should not meet with disappointment.
81.	We all know the mixed feelings of hope and despair with which, for many years now, the peoples of the world have been watching the protracted disarmament deadlock. No other problem today is more directly associated with the road that humanity must follow 2 peace is to be maintained and consolidated. We also know the tremendous difficulties in the way of obtaining a full or even a partial agreement on disarmament, mainly on account of the strength and the policies of expansion of one of the big Powers.
82.	Confronted by a growing empire, many nations of the world, including my own, were compelled to unite their forces to stem its expansion, as their own civilization, integrity and independence were by then most seriously threatened. Such an action for self- defence was not new in history and was a natural one. What we have to accept as new in history is that, through the subsequent arms race and the spectacular technical progress made in nuclear weapons, mankind has now the means to destroy itself. There exists, therefore, a potentially pre-apocalyptic situation afflicting all the peoples of the world.
83.	Unfortunately for all of us, if such is to be the general pattern, we have not yet reached what could be an accepted nuclear stalemate, which would render impracticable a third world war. This, I believe, will only come about when no firing of weapons of total destruction can take place without, in the same split second, unleashing a no less total and destructive retaliation. Such a situation may still be technically a long, long way off. Meanwhile, we all have to live with an immediate fear — the fear of a surprise attack.
84.	We are convinced that the present situation cannot possible be prolonged forever. Even Russian leadership, despite certain technical developments where it claims momentary advantages, is by now probably starting to realize — and we hope that if it has to realize it slowly, at least it will also realize it steadily — how impracticable it would be, in terms of the survival of their own country, to continue attempts to enlarge their influence through military means. Furthermore, the call from human conscience is too strong to be unheeded indefinitely. The peoples of the world are suffering; their minds and nerves are continually disturbed by international crises, the gravity of which is too often exaggerated by some for propaganda and political purposes. All the less developed countries are rightly eager for their economic and social development, and there is an ever deeper realization that a reduction of military expenses, which at present are crushing economies, would be of tremendous assistance in the development, progress and social well-being of the world populations.
85.	The free peoples of the world are longing, because of these facts, for a military agreement, but they obviously cannot accept any agreement that would mean for them surrender and servitude. They are eager for disarmament, but they want disarmament with self-preservation, disarmament with security. And in this resolve they are adamant.
86.	Few instances exist in the history of man in which the human mind has shown itself more fertile than in the search made by the Western Powers, during the past years, for a formula which would bring disarmament with security and which would be acceptable to the Soviet leaders. Such efforts, which no doubt will be pursued relentlessly, have, unfortunately, so far shown no results, due, we believe, to three main reasons: first, Soviet unwillingness to balance with the Western Powers certain military advantages which it possesses as a result of its geographical position and that of the countries which it dominates; secondly, Soviet unwillingness to discard some trump cards which it holds illegally — for example, the continuance of the Hungarian tragedy and the forced and unjust division of Germany; thirdly, Soviet weaknesses in confidence-credit, a kind of credit which it has largely dissipated through its attitudes and policies in the pre-war and post-war periods.
87.	All this, together with other aspects, makes imperative the realization that the crux of the whole problem of disarmament is the establishment of effective systems of inspection and control, if it is to be, as it must be, disarmament with security.
88.	Recent months have shown some progress on certain problems connected with the central problem of disarmament. In the words of the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Dulles, "a significant break- through" was made at Geneva on the arms control front, after the successful conclusion of the Conference of Experts to Study the Possibility of Detecting Violations of a Possible Agreement on the Suspension of Nuclear Tests; and there is hope that a substantive agreement may now be negotiated. There are also expectations that other technical studies on atomic fall-out and on measures to reduce the dangers of surprise attack may be undertaken.
89.	All this can be perhaps considered as the first rays of hope in what the Secretary-General calls "marginal approaches" to the central problem of disarmament itself. While not wishing prematurely to raise our hopes too high, we certainly welcome those developments with a renewed conviction that the difficulties encountered on the path towards disarmament with security will sooner or later, and through constant efforts, be overcome; for such is the moral mandate that all Governments, without any exclusion, have received from their peoples.
90.	Another problem which we would like to mention in this general debate is that of indirect aggression in its most modern manifestation of inflammatory broadcasting. As I said previously during the third emergency special session of the Assembly, my delegation would welcome the study, or the continuance of studies, by this Organization of such a question. We consider it a deleterious activity in which some, in different parts of the world, are indulging, and therefore the studies should be of a general character and not made only in regard to a particular area. The hope of peace would undoubtedly be greatly strengthened if through the efforts and Work of our Organization, ways and means could be devised to prevent the use of the radio to spread hatred and stimulate Unrest and civil strife among peoples of other countries. All this agitation and all these attempts at subversion, from which my country has not escaped, is making a pure mockery of the commitment inscribed in our Charter that nations should live as good neighbours. It is therefore a problem the solution of which requires new and urgent efforts.
91.	I now turn to a problem Which we consider also of paramount importance. I wish to refer to the efforts which have been made and are being made to bring about the betterment of living conditions in many parts of the world. In the opinion of my delegation, the progress and development of less developed countries is a vital issue, and represents a challenge which must be met with determination in order to defeat poverty, to combat disease, to eliminate unrest, to further human solidarity among peoples and nations, and to make available to all the benefits of science and of technology.
92.	It is, however, certain that material and economic progress will not by itself solve all the problems confronting us today. Moral and spiritual values also have to play their full part, and no effort should be spared to enlighten peoples and to defend them against subversive propaganda which, although utilizing the same words and slogans many times, puts into them an entirely different connotation, thus trying to foster purposes far remote from their real meaning, and which are designed merely to strengthen the economic and political power of some countries.
93.	But in counteracting such propaganda, it is essential that we should not lose sight of the other side of the picture. No successful or all-embracing policy is possible if it does not meet all the needs of the peoples. An active and relentless drive has to be pursued in all directions, so as to improve living standards and social and economic conditions generally in all less developed areas of the world. But to achieve this high purpose we must bear in mind that wide international co-operation is of the essence, and that the good will, generosity and understanding of those in a position to help are as necessary as a sense of responsibility, the efforts to provide good administration, the will power to work seriously and to stand on one's feet. These are factors essential on the part of those who are in need of help. Only thus may we be sure that any help rendered will be Independent of economic and political servitudes.
94.	Only thus, through close and wide international co-operation, can we hope gradually to narrow the gap existing between the developed and less developed nations, which otherwise could still be widened as the rate of economic development in an advanced country tends to be higher than in a less advanced country. Without that co-operation, such would be the situation, and we would have to resign ourselves to the thought that no speedy advancement would be possible in less developed areas. I am sure that all of us firmly reject this view.
95. But while working vigorously and to the utmost for the development of International aid, through bilateral and multilateral agreements, and also through this Organization and its specialized agencies and regional bodies, it would however be reasonable always to bear in mind, in order to try to avoid as much as possible having hopes become illusory, that private capital and recourse to it continue to play a most Important part in the development of the world's wealth.
96.	It is true that private capital will always require guarantees and compensations. But we believe that they do not necessarily need to affect the full sovereign power of self-determination of Governments, a right which we are the first to claim, and it is therefore difficult to understand why Governments, which have to satisfy the immediate needs of peoples, should not sometimes forget ideologies and political dissention and try to assure to private capital those guarantees which might be considered appropriate.
97.	I can assure the Assembly that my country, for its part, will not shrink from its duties towards the international community and will not fail, within its available resources, to lend its contribution to the strengthening and furtherance of international cooperation in order to achieve an increasingly speedy improvement of existing situations in less developed countries. Within the framework of the United Nations, its technical assistance programme and its specialized agencies, as well as through other inter-governmental regional organizations, of which we are also members, Portugal will discharge its responsibilities, always bearing in mind the paramount interest of the populations concerned.
98.	This leads me to refer very briefly to the Economic Commission for Africa. As we may recall, at the twelfth session of the General Assembly a resolution was adopted recommending to the Economic and Social Council the establishment of an Economic Commission for Africa [resolution 1155 (XII)]. Portugal voted in favour of that resolution and we followed with close attention the discussions on the subject at the twenty-sixth session of the Council. We believe that the text embodying the terms of reference of the Commission might be improved. But we raise no fundamental objections, and my Government is prepared to participate fully in the work of the Economic Commission for Africa. To this effect, a communication has just been addressed to the Secretary-General [E/3182], We shall lend our sincere and ready support to its activities, and we believe that in the fulfilment of its mandate, the Commission may accomplish much useful' work for the benefit of the continent of Africa, thus consolidating the path towards closer co-operation between Africa and Europe on the basis of equal partnership and mutual benefits. We believe, incidentally, that such co-operation is essential to bring about a great and firm prosperity and true independence for both continents, thereby strengthening the prospects of world peace.
99.	Further in connexion with the Economic Commission for Africa, it is our understanding that this new creation of the United Nations will be guided in its activities strictly in accordance with non-political considerations, and will deal with the various subjects on that basis only. We believe that this is the best course of action to follow, and that any deviation or departure therefrom may bring about the uselessness of the Commission, thus frustrating the high expectations which all of us are placing in the new body.
100.	We also believe that much is to be gained by close co-operation between the Commission and the specialized agencies, and other international regional organizations, which for a long time now have been operating in the area and which have covered much of the ground also allocated to the Commission for Africa. In this context we noted the statement contained in the introduction to the annual report of the Secretary-General [A/3844/Add.1] suggesting that concerted governmental action has so far been almost untried in the continent of Africa.
101.	This gives me the opportunity to recall that for ten years now close co-operation at the international level, in respect of the technical and scientific aspects of economic advancement, has been carried out in Africa with very fruitful results, and I am sure that the above-mentioned passage would have been drafted differently had the necessary information been available. Such being the case, it would be disastrous, in the opinion of my delegation, if, out of considerations which bear no connexion with the actual needs, there would be duplication or overlapping of efforts. The problems are many, the field is large, the task ahead is great, and there is room enough for the work of all existing organizations without any of them trying to duplicate or to interfere unduly in the work of others.
102.	We cannot afford to disperse our efforts through useless emulation and lack of co-ordination which in the end would merely be detrimental to the interests at stake. My delegation, however, has every hope that the same opinion is held by all concerned and that we all will do our utmost to carry out the common task ahead. For its part, my Government shall do its very best with this purpose in view. And certainly no one will doubt the sincerity of this purpose as the Portuguese nation has many of its overseas provinces located on the African continent.
103.	In this frame of mind we should like to praise some recent developments on the international scene as regards regional programmes of technical assistance and economic development. I recall the programme for the Middle East, which is under consideration and which we would be the first to welcome if the countries concerned decide to push it forward. Our historical and friendly ties with the Arab world lead us to see with great satisfaction, any plan which might bring about improvement and stability of conditions in the area.
104.	We should also like to indicate our agreement with the Foreign Minister of Japan when he expressed the earnest hope a few days ago [749th meeting] that by positive co-operation among the countries concerned a fund for regional development would be established in South-East Asia at an early date. We believe that the proposal deserves praise and encouragement.
105.	Last but not least, my delegation wishes to refer to the Pan-American Operation which was launched a few weeks ago. Its scope is vast and comprehensive and the Operation is conceived with vision on a statesmanlike scale. From the other side of the Atlantic we have hailed it with enthusiasm. To express our feelings towards the Pan-American Operation, my delegation can do nothing better than to quote parts of a message by Prime Minister of Portugal to the President of the Republic of Brazil: "From this side of the Atlantic we cannot view with indifference, but with rejoicing, the position taken in regard to the values of civilization which are at stake and the intention to develop that continent in order not only to provide for a better defence of the areas which are of concern to the free world, but also to increase the contribution which the twenty-one Latin American countries may make to the general cause. "If that great conglomeration of Western countries, the Latin American countries, could make their voice on world problems better heard, no one would view this with more sympathy and enthusiasm than ourselves. Equally, we look forward with the greatest satisfaction to the economic and social development which constitutes the main objective of the large Pan-American operation".
106.	Like our sister country and neighbour Spain, we maintain with all the Latin American nations specially close ties of deep friendship based on common values and common ideals. We all share the same traditions which, as the Foreign Minister of Argentina pointed out the other day in an impressive speech [751st meeting], emanate from Latin civilization and Christianity. This has given, to all of. us a distinct outlook and a universal understanding towards other peoples and nations and cultures.
107.	May I now say a final word as regards Portugal. Political conditions at home have fortunately give the Portuguese nation a period of peace, renovation and economic growth. To be sure, much remains to be done and we are hard at work, using our own resources to see to it that we shall not lag behind in an advancing world. A first six-year plan will be completed by the end of the year; a new development plan for the whole of the nation is under way, scheduled to start in January 1959. It provides for investments of over $1,000 million in six years, and we hope thereby gradually to increase the gross national product and generally improve living standards throughout the nation. The welfare of all sectors of the population is the Government's main concern, and through austerity, serious administration and hard work we shall strive to multiply the opportunities for all, thus fostering the advancement of all our various peoples. As a nation based on a multi-racial society, as a country whose structure allows for equal rights and duties, and which does not know any distinction based on social origin, race or creed of any of us, the Portuguese nation believes that above everything else there are the eternal values of human solidarity, equal partnership, social justice and the universality of man. These are our ideals and, as we see them, the ideals of the United Nations Charter. We shall always endeavour to live up to them.