51.	I should like first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the token of confidence and esteem bestowed upon you by the Assembly. At this crucial stage in the history of our Organization, we can rest assured that you will direct our discussions with calm and dignity, thus making it possible for the United Nations to respond to the hopes of all mankind.
52.	This September meeting of the United Nations offers those responsible for conducting the foreign affairs of Member States what is in effect a yearly seminar at which they can exchange their various views on the problems of peace and international cooperation and on all those questions which affect, the destinies of mankind. This periodic exercise, after the meditations and reflections inspired by the actions undertaken during the previous twelve months, undoubtedly assists them in their approach to outstanding problems and contributes slowly but surely to the settlement of those problems by peaceful means.
53.	The Government of the Republic of Tunisia wishes to reaffirm its unfailing attachment to the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations Charter, which, as it has solemnly declared, will constitute the basis of its policy in its relations with all other States, it is in accordance with this policy that my Government has persistently vindicated the principle of free cooperation, founded upon mutual respect for the sovereignty and dignity of States and free of any taint of hegemony or exploitation. Tunisia, a young country, which recovered its sovereignty and independence less than three years ago, has made a sustained effort to reshape its relations with other States, to "decolonize" them, if I may use that expression, and to bring them into an international context in keeping with the spirit of the Charter. Yet, the proclamation of Tunisia's independence and its recognition by all Powers has not eliminated all our problems and difficulties. My Government is making patient and continuing efforts to seek, jointly with the former protecting Power, a solution to all the questions over which we are still at odds, a solution which recognizes Tunisia's new status as a sovereign and independent State and which is in keeping with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter.
54.	The reason for my Government's untiring search for such a settlement in the case I have just referred to is that Tunisia, faithful to the policies it has adopted from the outset, is whole-heartedly in favour of settling disputes between States by means of negotiations or other peaceful methods, in conformity with the letter and the spirit of the Charter and according to the procedures laid down or referred to in the Charter. My Government is not content merely to advocate the settlement of disputes by peaceful means; it has had occasion to put the principle into practice by itself having recourse to that procedure in its serious dispute with the French Government, following the bombing of Sakiet-sidi-Youssef in February 1958 by French military aircraft operating from Algerian territory.
55.	After taking the case to the Security Council, my Government accepted the good offices of two friendly Powers, the United States and the United Kingdom, Since it proved possible in this case to come to a settlement, albeit a partial one, which did bring about some relaxation of the tension in Franco-Tunisian relations, my Government feels itself the more justified in recommending such peaceful procedures for the settlement of all international disputes which set nations at odds, disturb the harmony of their relations and threaten international peace and security.
56.	Threatened by the accumulation of means of destruction, so-called conventional armaments as well as atomic weapons, mankind lives in fear and anguish. This is the most poignant tragedy of our times, and we cannot help wondering whether it may not be the price we must pay for the scientific and technical progress which the mind of man has been able to achieve. Nevertheless, faith in man's destiny, a common attachment to spiritual principles and values inherited from our different civilizations and our profound devotion to the Purposes and Principles of the Charter should encourage us to pursue untiringly our work for general and controlled disarmament. The resources and energies thus set free could be used for peaceful purposes and could help to improve the economic and social welfare of mankind.
57.	In this connexion, my delegation must regret that it has not been possible to put resolutions 1148 (XII), 1149 (XII) and 1150 (XII), adopted by the General Assembly at its twelfth session, into effect. My delegation also regrets that because of the opposition of certain Member States directly concerned, the twenty- five member Commission found it impossible to sit and carry out the task assigned to it by the Assembly, Nevertheless, the work done at the Geneva Conference and the agreement reached recently by the experts who participated in it would seem to open encouraging prospects. All mankind is following this work with hope mingled with anxiety and earnestly desires to see it-come to a successful conclusion. The eminent speakers who have preceded me at this rostrum have told us of the concern felt by their Governments and peoples in this connexion, and have put before us a number of suggestions which merit the closest attention and the most profound study. My Government shares that concern and will give its fullest support to any effort made to bring about the reduction and control of stocks of atomic weapons and the cessation of nuclear tests. In this connexion, my Government feels it to be its duty to proclaim solemnly from this rostrum its complete opposition to the nuclear weapons tests proposed to be held in the Sahara. In this respect let me recall that Tunisia took part in the drafting of resolution No. XII, on international peace and security, adopted at the first Conference of Independent African States held at Accra in April 1958. Operative paragraph 2 of this resolution says: "The Conference of Independent African States... views with grave alarm and strongly condemns all atomic tests in any part of the world and in particular the intention to carry out such tests in the Sahara."
58.	However, the legitimate anxiety aroused by nuclear weapons should not make us lose sight of the considerable ravages which may be caused by "conventional" weapons. In order to safeguard peace and security in our tormented world we must restrict the use of these weapons, ensure their limitation and control, and replace the use of force in the settlement of disputes by recourse to the peaceful means of negotiation or mediation or to the machinery envisaged in the Charter.
59.	Quite recently, the guns have begun to rumble In the Far East, bringing fire and bloodshed to one of the most inflammable parts of the world, and constituting a serious threat to peace, In another part of the world, in Algeria, on the very borders of my country, an implacable conflict has been going on for nearly four years, between a proud and valiant people who are dying where they stand in order to regain their dignity and their right to independence, and another people who, while rich in liberal traditions, are nevertheless pursuing a rear-guard action merely in order to prolong an outworn and doomed régime which flies in the face of historical evolution. Considerable forces have been brought into play and are bringing death to tens and tens of thousands of young people on both sides, quite apart from the woes of the civilian population condemned to flight or exile. Waves of refugees, mainly old people, women and children, driven out of their ruined, burned and ravaged homes, are flooding into neighbouring countries, Tunisia in particular.
60.	My Government, knowing the repercussions which the continuance of this inhuman war must have upon the peace and stability of North Africa, a particularly sensitive part of the world, and moved by a deep desire to bring about a just settlement by peaceful means, In a spirit of friendly co-operation with France, has worked unceasingly to create favourable conditions for such a settlement, and this despite the serious tension which has from time to time arisen in the relations between France and Tunisia.
61.	At the most recent sessions of the General Assembly, the Tunisian delegation has done its best to make an effective and constructive contribution to the study of the Algerian problem and to the effort to find a solution based on the freedom and independence of the Algerian people with due safeguards for the legitimate interests of the parties involved. Moreover, Mr. Bourguiba, the President of the Republic of Tunisia, being intensely anxious to put an end to this extremely serious dispute and to strengthen the position of the United Nations and support its work, proposed in November 1957, with the full agreement of His Majesty Mohammed V, King of Morocco, that the Moroccan and Tunisian Governments should extend their good offices to the opposing parties with a view to seeking, at a Franco-North African conference, a just and peaceful solution, which will allow the Algerian people to realize their legitimate aspirations. Although the National Liberation Front accepted the Tunisian- Moroccan proposal at that time, the French Government unfortunately felt unable to approve it. However, the Moroccan and Tunisian Governments refuse to be discouraged; they regard their proposal as still in effect, and hope, in a spirit of friendship and cooperation, that they may be able to make some contribution towards a solution of the Franco-Algerian conflict.
62.	But meanwhile, events pursue their course: military forays and systematic combing-out operations are continuing relentlessly. The French Government continues to regard Algeria as an integral part of its national territory, unjustifiably citing Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter, and intends to impose by fire and sword on the Algerian people fighting to preserve their national existence and their own identity, a referendum on a draft constitution which concerns the people of France, and the people of France alone.
63.	Much could be said about the propriety and validity of a referendum held under conditions such as those now prevailing in Algeria. Can we accept the view that a ballot of this type can be held in a country ravaged and tortured by nearly four years of war, that voting can go on under the pressure of a foreign army of 800,000 men, particularly when that army is responsible for preparing the electoral lists and the conduct of the ballot? No; we cannot accept such an outrage to the conscience of a people and the most elementary principles of law and democracy. More over, the problem is of a quite different order. The Algerian people are fighting for their freedom and are Interested, not in deciding on the constitutional system under which the French people will live, but in freeing their country from a colonial system instituted 128 years ago by force of arms and by virtue of an alleged, "right of conquest". Despite reverses, the Algerian people have never consented to abandon their sovereignty and have always sought to recover their independence.
64.	Disregarding the lessons of history, and the spirit and the letter of the Charter, which proclaims the inviolability and universality of the right of self-determination of peoples endeavouring to turn the inexorable tide of history, the French Government clings to its intransigent position and goes so far as to say that discussion of the Franco-Algerian question by the United Nations would be mischievous and harmful. It is a matter for profound regret that the French delegation utterly refuses to co-operate with our Organization in the search for a peaceful, democratic and just settlement of the dispute which is now bathing Algeria in blood. It is deeply saddening to friends of France, like ourselves, to see the futility and failure of our unwearying efforts to help France and to help the Algerian people to break free from the deadlock in which they have become involved.
65.	In view of the intransigence and the regrettable obduracy of the French Government, in view of this deadlock, the leaders of the National Liberation Front, who are the representatives and guardians of the interests of the Algerian people in its struggle for freedom, have been forced by circumstances to take precautionary measures. They have recently decided to set up a provisional government of the Algerian Republic.
66.	On 19 September 1958 my Government recognized the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic under the presidency of Mr. Ferhat Abbas. This recognition is in conformity with the solidarity between the North African countries and their determination to work in a constructive spirit for the restoration of peace in this area. It implies no change in the traditional policy of the Government of the Tunisian Republic, based on mutual respect and free co-operation between the Arab Maghreb and France. On the contrary, my Government — I make this as a solemn declaration from this platform — intends to respect its obligations towards France and to reinforce the ties of friendship and free co-operation with that country.
67.	Tunisia firmly believes that the establishment of an Algerian Government will help to inspire a fuller awareness of the responsibilities incumbent upon the Algerian people and their leaders and will subsequently promote mutual understanding. That is why my Government greeted the emergence of a provisional Government of the Algerian Republic as a decisive step towards the early settlement of the Franco-Algerian conflict and the inauguration of an era of peace and free co-operation between the Arab Maghreb and France. My Government continues to be prepared to play its part in any constructive and realistic initiative and to seek by all peaceful means a just settlement of the Franco-Algerian conflict.
68.	The few ideas I have outlined in connexion with the Franco-Algerian dispute are, in my delegation's view, applicable to the settlement of all disputes and conflicts of the same nature. My Government solemnly declares its unswerving devotion to the principle of self-determination and intends to make an effective contribution to the triumph and fulfilment of that principle throughout the world, whatever the colour of the skin or religious beliefs of the peoples who are demanding it and whichever may be the colonial power involved.
69.	The situation in the Middle East has n been a matter of close concern to my Government, which was gratified by the Tunisian delegation's contribution to the work of the third emergency special session and awaits with keen interest the Secretary-General's report on the mission entrusted to him by the General Assembly. My Government believes that only a settlement worked out by the States concerned or in close liaison and full co-operation with them is likely to produce the necessary relaxation of tension and to restore stability in that area. The Tunisian Government expresses its most sincere wishes for the success of the continued and devoted efforts of the Secretary-General to whose unwearying enthusiasm I should like to pay tribute.
70.	At another level, my Government has maintained a constant and unwavering interest in the formation of a permanent international United Nations police force. In this connexion I should like to remind you of the words spoken two years ago here by President Bourguiba: "We shall work to strengthen the United Nations 30 that it may be not only a moral force but a genuine supranational tribunal which lays down the law and has the ability to enforce it." [590th meeting, para. 192]
71.	This step, which has been the subject of much discussion and lengthy debates, as yet shows no sign of being put into practical effect. In this connexion, it might be useful to consider the appointment of a committee to draft a constitution for this international force in collaboration with the Secretary-General and the Military Staff Committee.
72.	It is not my intention to review all the items on the Assembly's agenda. At the appropriate time my delegation will state its views on the questions under discussion. I wish only to draw attention to the items which my delegation considers most urgent and most critical.
73.	As a young African and Arab country aware of its responsibilities and the moral obligations which ensue from independence, Tunisia is following developments in the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories with constant attention and vigilant concern. The Charter plainly states that those Territories are to develop towards self-determination and independence. In deference to the Purposes and Principles of the Charter, the Administering Authorities should guide the peoples of those Territories to a stage of development where they are capable of self-government and freely deciding on their future as soon as possible. In the meanwhile, our Organization must be kept informed of the progress achieved in this field.
74.	These islands of slavery, the colonies and dependent territories, must disappear from the face of the world and give place to nations united by ties of brotherhood in dignity and mutual respect. In 1956 President Bourguiba said in this very hail; "The United Nations cannot be content merely to welcome those who have wontheirfreedom,itshould hold out its hand to all the peoples fighting to achieve their national aspirations so that they can acquire the dignity of free nations." flbid.. para. 181.]
75.	This year has seen a specific demonstration of the "young and newly-awakened African conscience". On the initiative of President Bourguiba and Prime Minister Nkrumah, representatives of eight independent African States met in conference at Accra in April 1958 and decided to unite their efforts to strengthen peace, promote wider international co-operation, strengthen the prestige and moral authority of the United Nations and hasten the dawn of an age of justice, freedom, and prosperity. Throughout the African continent 15 April will be celebrated as a day of hope and faith in a happier future for mankind. My Government will do everything in its power to help on the burgeoning of this African renaissance and is already taking steps to give effect to the resolutions of the Accra conference. This action will lay the foundations of an "Africanism" firmly determined to keep in contact with the outside world, anxious to promote free and honest co-operation with all States in dignity and mutual respect and will, I am convinced, contribute to the coming of a better age for mankind, free from fear, poverty, ignorance and disease.
76.	I should like finally to make some reference to my delegation's consistent position on the question of assistance to countries in the process of development. Political independence would be incomplete if it was not accompanied by development of national resources and the improvement of the economic and social conditions of the people. In a world where technical progress to a large extent determines the relations between peoples and States, and the maintenance of peace is dependent upon a more equitable distribution of wealth, it is of the highest importance to unite all efforts and co-ordinate all energies to promote the economic development of countries and increase the well-being of their peoples. There is no body better qualified than the United Nations to provide that assistance in the purest and most disinterested form; no other body can give it this quality of true human solidarity. It is in this spirit that the Tunisian delegation has consistently supported the establishment of the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development and continues to hope that all obstacles in the way of the Fund's establishment will eventually be overcome and that it will bring both comfort and hope to mankind, now so cruelly beset by uncertainty and need.
77.	My delegation also welcomes the establishment of the Economic Commission for Africa and hopes great things from the technical assistance which that Commission will provide to African countries.
78.	I wish in conclusion to affirm the faith of the Tunisian Government and people in an age; of peace, justice and concord between peoples and nations achieved through the harmonious operation of the United Nations and its agencies. Our Organization is the depository of a great hope, and it is its duty to live up to the expectations of all mankind that an age of happiness, prosperity, justice and freedom is about to dawn. In order to achieve this supreme goal, it must consolidate peace, ensure stability and promote tree and honest operation, so true is it that true peace is inseparable from justice, freedom and progress.