1.	Mr. President, Gentlemen, by a happy chance the Ukrainian delegation is speaking in the general debate on the eve of the anniversary of the launching of the first earth satellite into outer space. This event of world-wide importance took place in the Soviet Union on 4 October 1957.
2.	This penetration into outer space gave rise to many important problems both in science and international politics which remain to be studied and evaluated thoroughly, and this will obviously take some time.
3.	Now that the third Soviet satellite, incomparably greater in weight and scientific importance, is making its two-thousandth flight around the earth and can be easily observed, even here in New York, we must indeed pay a tribute to the ability and daring of the Soviet peoples who have blazed a path into Outer space and have opened a new and splendid chapter in the history of mankind.
4.	The satellite is circling the earth at an unheard-of speed, enriching our knowledge of the universe and extending man's potential mastery of the profound secrets of nature. But it also makes us think of something else — how important it is for all of us to seek the path of co-operation, of peaceful coexistence and of the application of die great discoveries of science and technology for the good of man, and not his harm.
5.	The Ukrainian delegation feels that it is its duty to make these observations on the first anniversary of the launching of the earth satellite because the activity of the United Nations is Still not on a level with the tasks mankind is facing through the rapid development of science. Do we really need to convince anyone here that the appearance of earth satellites, both Soviet and American — and we may see satellites launched in other countries as well — makes it more urgent than ever for us to answer the question: how can we turn our United Nations Organization into an effective instrument of peace, how can we prevent a development of events by which the greatest discovery of the human mind — the release of nuclear energy can be used by the imperialist forces for the harm instead of for the good of mankind?
6.	We have only to ask that question to realize what a noble task it is which confronts the United Nations and how inadequately it is being carried out. And this, I may say, is not fortuitous. There are still forces in the West, primarily here in the United States, to whom the peaceful development of mankind is distasteful. They want conflicts, wars and international tension in order to maintain a war economy and to prevent a fall in the profits of monopolies.
7.	What record of "achievements" have the United States and Britain brought to this session of the General Assembly? The intervention in Lebanon and Jordan! Their blunt refusal to admit the People's Republic of China to the United Nations! Provocative measures against peace in the Far East! These are truly unenviable achievements.
8.	The Soviet Union and the other peace-loving States have made and are still making every effort to improve the international atmosphere. They have done everything they could to implement the principles of peaceful coexistence. Ah example of this was the resolution of the twelfth session of the General Assembly [resolution 1236 (XII)] — "Peaceful and neighbourly relations among States" — which called upon all States to make every effort to strengthen international peace, and to develop friendly and co-operative relations and settle disputes by peaceful means. In everything they do the Socialist States are setting an example of the practical application of these important principles.
9.	The Soviet Union has presented certain proposals for the establishment of a security system in Europe, it has called upon the United States to conclude a treaty of peace and friendship and prevent intervention in the internal affairs of the countries of the Near and Middle East, it has ceased its own nuclear tests unilaterally, and it has called upon the United States and Great Britain to do the same. These are only some of the Soviet Union's proposals aimed at extending the sphere of peaceful coexistence and strengthening peace and good-neighbourly relations between all States. The Ukrainian people naturally supported the Soviet Government's measures unanimously since they regard them as a manifestation of true concern for the preservation of international peace.
10.	It can certainly not be said that the efforts of United States official circles and the efforts of the State Department have been directed towards the same aim. No, it cannot. Last year the United States voted in favour of the General Assembly resolution which I have mentioned, but this year that resolution was trampled underfoot by the American Marines in Lebanon.
11. The Soviet Union aims at devoting its scientific progress solely to peace. It has called and is calling upon the Western Powers to come to their senses before it is too late and, instead of engaging in an armaments race, to vie with one another in peaceful pursuits, in improving people’s living conditions, in stamping out disease and in promoting culture and science. As a powerful State the Soviet Union would like to base its relations with other States on principles of mutual respect and non-intervention in the internal affairs of others. The Soviet Union is striving for the peaceful solution of disputed questions, founded on the mutual respect of countries for each others' interests.
12.	The same cannot be said of the United States. The United States and its closest associates in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are not pursuing the same aims. Everyone can see how the American whirlwind of blackmail and threats first strikes in one place and then in another all over the world.
13.	Scientific and technical discoveries can be used for the good of the present and future generations, or they can be used for a war unequalled in devastation and mass annihilation. Peace is the greatest gift man can have. But the world we live in is becoming a world of gloomy anxiety as a result of the increasing concentration of radioactive matter around us which can lead to serious illness and which threatens the normal development of our progeny. The process of radioactive concentration can be halted only if the atomic Powers halt the testing of all types of atomic and hydrogen weapons forever.
14.	I have already pointed out that the Soviet Union, actuated by its concern for peace and the fate of future generations, ended the testing of atomic and hydrogen weapons on 31 March 1958, on a unilateral basis. Similar steps have not been taken by the United States and Britain. The Governments of the United States and Great Britain are avoiding the immediate cessation of nuclear tests by looking for all possible loop-holes and producing all sorts of reservations and preliminary conditions.
15.	The Soviet Union made a considerable unilateral reduction in its armed forces. Everyone possessed of good will hoped that the Western Powers would follow the USSR's example, but that was not the case. The United States has even halted the slight reduction which had been previously announced. Are not the American soldiers in the Near East and in the Taiwan region the very ones who could be sent back home to their families?
16.	The Soviet Union has proposed a top-level meeting between Eastern and Western statesmen to discuss urgent international problems. The United States and Britain, however, have done everything they could to prevent this meeting. Have they not played this part a little too crudely? A meeting of this kind should be held in an atmosphere of honesty and frankness without reference to problems which cannot be settled at it or which should not be discussed. By bringing up matters involving the situation in the countries of Eastern Europe the United States and Britain are asking for the impossible.
17.	These are all facts. They show that the Soviet Union, having achieved striking successes in the scientific field and having consolidated its might, has acted in international politics in keeping with the interests of peace and international co-operation. And it is the good fortune of mankind that there is as powerful a State in the world as the Soviet Union with aims no more ambitious than the desire to preserve peace and prevent another war.
18.	The same can certainly not be said of certain other States Members of the United Nations, notably those countries that are accustomed to wield the "big stick" and that attempt to force other countries to adopt a line of action of benefit to NATO.
19.	With the appearance of inter-continental ballistic missiles and satellites in outer space, with the formation of a powerful camp of peace-loving Socialist countries, the need for reappraisal of the nature and methods of the policy of the United States and the other members of the aggressive North Atlantic bloc is more pressing than ever before. But the Western Powers are still acting as before and ignoring the dictates of common sense,
20.	For instance, the official propaganda of the West has ascribed non-existent aggressive intentions to the Soviet Union for many years. This slanderous propaganda makes it rather easier for the United States to rouse some sort of community spirit and solidarity in other countries under the flag of NATO and to impose upon them colossal military expenditure. The arms race, dictated by the profit-seeking interests of the capitalist monopolies, has assumed a particularly alarming scale since science penetrated into outer space.
21.	Enormous sums of money are being squandered on the arms race. The States belonging to the North Atlantic bloc have spent more than $400,000 million on military preparations. This sum has been exacted from the population in taxes and by other means, which has naturally reduced the purchasing power of the population. If this amount of money had been spent on wage increases, public education and health instead, more favourable conditions would certainly have been created for overcoming many of the difficulties which the capitalist countries are now experiencing. Abandonment of the arms race would have kept prices down and prevented inflation, which has now become one of the most unhealthy problems in these countries.
22.	The military and political leaders of NATO assert against all truth that orders for military supplies stimulate the over-all production of those countries. But we know that it is precisely the NATO countries which have been experiencing a serious depression for some time, and further militarization of the economy will not help to solve these economic problems, but will only aggravate them.
23.	Certain political economists in the West apparently find consolation in the fact that the arms race will make the Soviet Union and peoples’ democracies spend ever greater resources on defence measures and thereby slow down their economic development. Such calculations are unfounded. We should naturally like to use all our resources and possibilities for peaceful purposes, but the need to strengthen the defence of the socialist countries does divert a certain amount from the path of peaceful construction.
24.	However, the circles in the West that have not given up their hopes of slowing down the economic development of the socialist countries, are measuring us by their own yardstick — a yardstick which is not applicable to socialism. It is enough to note that the industrial output of these countries last year exceeded the pre-war level by almost four and a half times. The countries o2 the socialist camp, especially in the last few years, have made great strides in increasing agricultural output and in supplying the population with consumer goods. Every coming year will yield better and better results.
25.	In stepping up the arms race certain officials in the NATO countries are making every effort to justify the doctrine of interrelationship and interdependence. It seems that all is not well in the house of NATO if this new doctrine has now proved necessary. The aggression of Britain in Jordan and the United States in Lebanon leaves no doubt as to the foreign political essence of the so-called doctrine of interrelationship and interdependence, widely advertised from this platform.
26.	The third emergency special session of the General Assembly examined in detail the events of the Near and Middle East as a result of which the international situation greatly deteriorated and the peace of the world was threatened. More than a month has passed since the Assembly, on 21 August 1958, adopted a resolution [1237 (ES-III)] calling for the withdrawal of United States and British armed forces from Lebanon and Jordan. Yet the troops of the interventionists are still on Arab soil, pressure is still being exerted on the Arab countries and interference in their internal affairs continues.
27.	Remembering the universally severe condemnation of their aggressive policy at the third emergency special session, the United States and Britain are now doing everything they can to justify somehow or other their non-compliance with the resolution.
28.	Mr. Lloyd, British Foreign Secretary, said here on 25 September 1958 that "it is our earnest desire that the good words of the resolution of 21 August should be translated into action" [758th meeting, para. 54]. But from Mr. Lloyd's subsequent arguments we are supposed to conclude that the withdrawal of troops is being prevented by the Arab countries themselves (with emphasis on the United Arab Republic) which are violating the terms of the resolution of 21 August. We then come logically to the conclusion that inasmuch as the Arab States are violating the resolution (though there is no proof of this), the withdrawal of troops becomes, for Britain, extremely problematic. Let us say quite bluntly that this ruse is not a very original one.
29.	The United States Secretary of State also expatiated on the “responsibility of the Arab States”. Once again, if this refers to the withdrawal of American forces from Lebanon, the Arab States have nothing to do with it. Their wish, like that of the overwhelming majority of Members of the United Nations, is clearly expressed in the resolution of 21 August and states, as is well known, that the Secretary-General should "make forthwith... such practical arrangements as would help in upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter in relation to Lebanon and Jordan in the -present circumstances, and thereby facilitate the early withdrawal of the foreign troops from the two countries". But the interventionist forces are still in Arab soil, and Mr. Dulles lays the blame for this on the Arab States which have been victimized by the aggressive policy of the United States.
30.	On 29 September 1958 the Secretary-General gave his first report [A/3934/Rev.1] on Implementation of the resolution of the third emergency special session. It is not clear from the report which of the practical steps recommended by him with regard to Lebanon and Jordan will further the withdrawal of foreign forces or when it will take place.
31.	Instead we are given samples of what would call masterly vagueness in which the question of withdrawing American forces from Lebanon and British forces from Jordan is tied to a whole number of conditions such as when "the situation in the area allows", and "provided the international security situation with respect to Lebanon continues to improve". It may be pure chance or it may be by a coincidence of points of view, but the notion of the "line of action" of the Arab States mentioned in the speeches of Messrs. Dulles and Lloyd also runs through the report; according to it, the Arab States themselves are making the prompt withdrawal of foreign troops difficult. This political camouflage should deceive no one.
32.	The situation in the Far East arouses serious anxiety about the future of peace. Representatives not only of African and Asian countries, but even of those countries which have not yet found enough courage to reject the United States policy of negotiating from "a position of strength", have expressed deep concern at what is happening off the coast of the People's Republic of China.
33.	The real causes of the existing tension in that area were explained in a statement by Mr. Chen-Yi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China on 20 September 1958. He said; inter alia; "The United States has invaded and occupied our territory of Taiwan. Recently it has concentrated there further armed forces of considerable size in order to prevent the Chinese people from recovering the islands of Quemoy and Matsu and the other offshore islands and thereby to create a serious threat to peace in the Far East and in the whole world."
34.	Some people here have tried to juggle with various dates. The events in the area of the off-shore islands did not begin in August of this year, but when the United States Fleet was transferred to Taiwan and the other Chinese islands, on the false pretext that the islands must be held for the sake of United States "security". Having interfered in the civil war and taken Chiang Kai-shek and his followers under its wing, the United States then declared Taiwan a State, if you please, and even concluded a "treaty" with it. That is aggression pure and simple, though not new inform. This concern for "security" has been used by the United States as an excuse before. Was it hot on this pretext that United States troops were landed on Soviet soil in the first years of the socialist State's existence?
35.	Can the People's Republic of China look on these actions of the United States as legitimate and just? Of course not. No one who does not want to fly in the face of truth will recognize them as such. The Chinese people has a right to extend its Sovereignty Over the whole of Chinese territory, and it will do so. Aggression is committed, not by those who defend a righteous cause, but by those who hinder them, those who arm the followers of Chiang Kai-shek, those who send their aircraft and warships to the coast of the People's Republic of China.
36.	The People's Republic of China is engaged in a just cause. Injustice is being done by those who seek to turn an internal affair of China into an international question and to provide some basis and justification for their aggressive infringement of the sovereign rights of the People's Republic of China over Taiwan and all the off-shore islands, and for their aggression against the great Chinese people. It is thus no accident that a State Department memorandum on the United States policy of non-recognition of the Chinese Communist régime openly proclaims that the United States is striving "to hasten the passing" of the People's Republic of China.
37.	As we all know, the aggressive imperialist policy of the United States towards the Chinese people has deep, very deep roots. It is rooted in the notorious "open-door" policy proclaimed by John Hay more than half a century ago. From time to time United States representatives refer to this "open-door" policy as a proof that it has always been the policy of the United States to protect China from foreign domination. But those who know their history are aware of the imperialist nature of the "open-door" idea. It was based on a desire to loot the natural riches of China, to ill- treat and humiliate the Chinese people, to perpetuate its feudal backwardness and to keep the country in colonial status.
38.	We may remind the United States delegation at the United Nations that Mr. Conger, the United States diplomatic representative in China at that time, saw in the Hay policy a means of keeping China in a state of impotence; I repeat: in a state of impotence. Is it not to this state that the present protectors of Chiang Kai-shek's clique of venal traitors want to return China?
39.	Who better than the Chinese people recalls that painful period in its history when the imperialist skillfully took advantage of its weakness, its disunity, its impotence and dismembered the living body of China, dividing it into spheres of interest and setting up puppet regimes and a State within the State. The United States proclaimed its "open-door" policy, and through the open door rushed the United States tycoons, great and small, anxious not to be left behind in the plunder of China.
40.	Since that time much water has flowed under the bridges. Today the People's China, a giant freed from chains, has forever closed its doors to imperialist brigands. But it opens them to friends, to all those whose intentions are good and who respect its independence and sovereignty. Of course, this China does not suit the aggression-minded groups in the United States. They have not enough sense of reality to recognize that historical changes have taken place in the life of the great Chinese people. They have still not abandoned the wild dream of once again opening the door to China by force of arms, using Taiwan and the other off-shore islands as a bridgehead for aggression. They clutch at the Chiang Kai-shek clique in the vain hope of stemming the tide of history.
41.	In order to mislead world public opinion, the whole vast propaganda machine of the United States, as at a word of command, has been publicizing the story put out by Mr. Dulles, that normalization of the situation in the Far East depends on a cease fire. In the General Assembly heart-rending appeals have been made for a renunciation of the use of force as an instrument of foreign policy. Mr. Couve de Murville, the French: minister of Foreign Affairs, stated, in particular [758th meeting], that in his opinion "resorting to force is never a good way of settling political conflicts". Mr. Lloyd spoke in the same vein [Ibid.] when he said: "The whole international community should join in insisting that this matter should not be settled by force".
42.	These are odd remarks, coming as they do from representatives of those States which not only extol the policy of negotiating from "a position of strength", but also apply it in international relations. But in point of fact, those who have suddenly been seized with such a love of peace proceed from the view that relations between the People's Republic of China and Taiwan are international, that they are relations between States, if that were the case, the principle that the use of force is forbidden would indeed apply. But their view is clearly distorted: in China there are not two Governments, nor, consequently, two States, and therefore relations between them cannot be subject to the above rule of international law. There is only one China and. it alone can be concerned in international affairs.
43.	In China there has then a revolution which has set the people free. The corrupt Kuomintang régime was overturned and the People's Republic of China was firmly established in its place. Its power now extends over the whole territory of China, with the exception of Taiwan, the Penghu Islands and the other off-shore islands, which for many centuries have been geographically and economically part of mainland China. The Chinese people demands the return of territory which has been its since time immemorial. It is fully entitled to take whatever measures it considers necessary with respect to Chiang Kai-shek's forces entrenched on the off-shore islands.
44.	The Chinese people is not at war with the United States, so that the question of a cease fire does not arise. For nearly nine years Chiang Kai-shek's forces have bombed China from the off-shore islands and from Taiwan, and no one — not Mr. Dulles, not Mr. Lloyd, not Mr. Couve de Murville — let fall one word of regret on that subject. When, therefore, the representatives of France and the United Kingdom condemn the retaliatory action of the People's Republic of China against the Chiang Kai-shek group, it is the duty of all who still remember the meaning of justice to condemn, not the People's Republic of China, but the United States, for causing tension where it would not exist if the United States stopped interfering in the internal affairs of the Chinese people.
45.	If we want to be true to the United Nations Charter, and to preserve peace in the Far East, we must obtain the early withdrawal of United States armed forces from that region and put a stop to United States interference in the internal affairs of the People's Republic of China.
46.	The reckless policy of the United States is not confined to the off-shore islands or the Near East; it is applied Over the whole world. It is scarcely possible for anyone to retain any illusions on this point since the United States Secretary of State, speaking to the Atlantic Treaty Association in Boston on 27 September 1958, declared for all to hear that the very same principles underlay United States policy in the Taiwan region and NATO policy in Europe.
47.	As in the Far East, so in Europe, the policy of the United States harbours a threat to peace, for its corner-atone is the transformation of the western zone of Germany into a militarist atomic Power. The militarization of Western Germany and the formation of the Bundeswehr. armed with the latest weapons of destruction, are being brought about through the efforts of those industrialists and financiers who have concentrated economic power in their own hands, and who are now seeking to instil in the German soldiery the idea of a revanche. Memories of the bitter years of the Second World War are still too fresh for mankind to forget that the German industrialists — those barons of the factory chimneys — were the very people who brought Hitler to power and plunged the world into war and Nazi atrocities.
48.	Now these same monopolists impose their will on th6 present politicians of Western Germany. Once more patrons from across the ocean are putting weapons into the hands of Germans intent on their revanche; this time the weapons are atom bombs. At first (and this was set down in the treaties of Bonn and Paris) the ruling circles of Western Germany stated that they would forego atomic weapons. Lately they have been asserting that the entry of the Federal Republic of Germany into NATO would impose specific obligations on it, and that it must therefore have these weapons — whispering all the while in the ears of the gullible that this would be in the interests of peace and disarmament! At present the Federal Republic of Germany demands unlimited possession of atomic weapons. Well, gentlemen from NATO, are we not fully entitled to call this a revival of the Munich policy?
49.	Will not such patronage put too great a temptation in the way of the revanchistes and of all those who have learned nothing from past experience? There are not and cannot be any guarantees that politicians who think only in military terms, having at their disposal not merely fleets of tanks, but also nuclear weapons and rockets, will not precipitate a war in order to satisfy their longing for a revanche.
50.	As past experience shows, not eastern Europe alone but western Europe too would be engulfed in the tide of war if the German revanchistes were to embark on such a venture. This is especially true in our time, when any armed conflict threatens to grow into a worldwide conflagration. It would be dangerous to forget that fact.
51.	The Ukrainian people, of course, cannot and will not forget the lessons of Hitler's invasion. We have not forgotten, either, that we must learn to recognize a catastrophe while it can still be prevented, and not wait until it bursts over the heads of millions of people.
52.	Such is the record of events merely for the single year since the appearance of the first artificial earth satellite. It is not difficult to see who is responsible for aggravating the international situation. Despite this complicated situation, the peoples of the world have not lost faith in the success of the peace policy followed by peace-loving States. The United Nations might suddenly take on new life if it freed itself of the trammels that now doom it to impotence, and devoted its energies to curbing the forces of imperialist aggression.
53.	The General Assembly can and must promote that end at the present session, for its sacred mission is to promote the maintenance of peace. There are a number of important questions on its agenda a positive solution of which is in the vital interests of all States Members of the United Nations. First and foremost among them is, of course, the problem of disarmament. The need to solve that problem has never been so pressing as it is at present. The armaments race grows daily more menacing, until there is but a desperately small step left between piling up weapons and using them. It is absolutely essential to reach an agreement on the partial measures of disarmament submitted to the General Assembly for consideration in the USSR Government’s memorandum [A/3929].
54.	One measure, both simple and easy to carry out, would be to stop tests of nuclear weapons once and for all. The Ukrainian delegation supports the USSR delegation's proposal [A/3915] to discuss this question at the current session of the General Assembly independently of other disarmament questions. The General Assembly must take an acceptable decision, without any conditions or reservations, and without making agreement on the cessation of tests dependent on satisfactory progress regarding the problem of disarmament as a whole.
55.	A positive decision on another important disarmament question, introduced as a separate agenda item by the USSF delegation [A/3925], would also be a considerable achievement on the part of the United Nations. We have in mind the item entitled, "The reduction of the military budgets of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and France by 10 to 15 per cent and the use of part of the savings so effected for assistance to the underdeveloped countries". For the sake of security and the development of peace-time economies, there must be a substantial decrease in the military budgets of all States, and first of all of the great Powers whose military expenditure provides the main stimulus for the armaments race.
56.	Such a measure would, without doubt, lead to a general rise in prosperity and increase the ability of the great Powers to assist the economically less developed countries. The urgent need to expand such assistance is obvious to everybody. Other ways of expanding it must, of course, also be used. With this in mind, the Government of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic intends to participate in the United Nations Special Fund now being established, an organization which can greatly broaden the scope of international technical assistance to the less developed countries. Useful activity by the United Nations in this sphere could be expanded considerably, making use of the funds which would be freed through a reduction of the military budgets of the great Powers, as proposed by the Soviet Union.
57.	One of the most important aspects of United Nations activity is the solution of international economic, social, health, and related problems so as to promote social progress and higher standards of living. This offers unlimited possibilities for fruitful cooperation between all nations.
58.	In our time, the united efforts of all peoples and countries to master the secrets of nature and to create fitting living conditions for men have acquired unprecedented importance. The need for further expansion of international co-operation to these ends is obvious. Such co-operation will, without doubt, also have as favourable influence on the political climate in the world and contribute to greater understanding between peoples and States. In this connexion we may note the collaboration which has begun and is developing in the peaceful use of atomic energy; the United Nations deserves all credit for this. Considerable success has attended the collaboration and co-ordination of activities of the world's scientists in carrying out the International Geophysical Year, 1957-1958.
59.	On the instructions of the Ukrainian Government, our delegation has submitted for consideration by the General Assembly at its present session a proposal [A/3920 and Add. 1] for the organization of an International Public Health and Medical Research Year in 1960. The primary purposes of the Year would be: first, to unite the separate efforts of individual countries in the battle against dangerous diseases, to coordinate scientific research, and to expand the exchange of advanced medical experience among all countries; secondly, to provide increased aid for setting up public health services in the under-developed countries.
60.	Despite the considerable achievements of medicine in recent decades, the peoples of the whole world still suffer from disease. Unfortunately, no effective means has yet been found of combating many illnesses, such as cancer and cardio-vascular ailments. Such major diseases as malaria, tuberculosis, smallpox and poliomyelitis are also widespread.
61.	We cannot but note the fact that certain diseases which have been entirely, or very nearly, stamped out in some countries, continue to rage in others. Malaria, for example, has been practically eliminated in most European countries, including the Ukraine, but in other regions of the world, particularly in southern countries, according to the statistics of the World Health Organization, 300 million people contract this disease every year, and 3 million of them die. Other major diseases claim many lives. The invisible world of microbes, viruses and other micro-organisms, some known and others as yet unknown, wages a veritable war on mankind.
62.	The time has come to unite the various groups of scientists, doctors and health workers which now operate in relative isolation, and to co-ordinate the activities of the different countries in an organized campaign against these ruthless and insidious enemies of man. The Government of the Ukrainian SSR hopes that the organization of an International Public Health and Medical Research Year will prove a most useful measure for this purpose. We are assuming that the World Health Organization, which has considerable experience in co-ordinating joint activities by the different= countries of the world in the struggle against disease, will take part in the organization and execution of the International Year. We trust also that all States will respond to an appeal by the United Nations and will co-operate in every possible way to solve, important scientific and practical problems in the field of medicine and health.
63.	The experience of the United Nations shows that the key to its success lies in strict and unfailing observance of the Charter. The attempt of some Powers; to turn it into an instrument for achieving their own ends renders the United-Nations powerless. It. is constantly taking decisions which do not reflect the real situation in the world. We hope that at its present session the General Assembly will choose the best course, that of strict observance of the Charter and the solution of international problems in the interests of maintaining peace and international security.