21.	It is a high honour for me and also a source of personal satisfaction to address you from this world rostrum as the spokesman of a Government and people who are today firm in their resolve to stand as zealous and democratic defenders of the cause of liberty and civilization. As Venezuelan Minister of Foreign Affairs and Chairman of the Venezuelan delegation to the thirteenth session of the General Assembly, I am pleased to affirm that my country is now definitely following paths leading towards the establishment of institutions based on the principles for whose safeguard the United Nations was founded. I can also state that the years of violence and anguish now definitely belong to the past. That era, which was so rightly condemned and criticized, is now ended and all that is good and permanent in Venezuela has once more come to the fore.
22.	The widespread changes that have taken place in Venezuela since 23 January 1958 are reflected in the standards on which its foreign policy is now based. We reject as contradictory and Incongruous the behaviour of a Government which, using self-seeking propaganda, conceals a contrast between theory and practice such that it dares to adopt before foreigners attitudes opposed to those which it assumes towards its own citizens. Fortunately so gross a confusion of fact is always transitory and in some way or other such false positions are eventually doomed to collapse.
23.	When the Government which I represent declares that Venezuela has aligned itself with the democratic countries which respect human dignity and countenance no kind of oppression, this is not false propaganda but the declaration of a truth deeply felt by the Venezuelan people and based on indisputable moral authority. As the representative of a country completely devoted to democratic principles and therefore opposed to all forms of tyranny and absolutism prejudicial to human dignity, I should like to refer to some of the more serious problems that are to be considered by this world parliament during its current session.
24.	I share the opinion of those who have stated from this rostrum that the present Assembly has opened in one of the most disquieting moments in all history. This makes it necessary for us to be fully aware of the magnitude of our responsibilities. Our task is not only to study the problems before us in an atmosphere of calm reflection but also to find, through firm collective action, solutions which will put an end to the present disturbances. This is what the peoples whom we represent expect of us. To disappoint their hopes is to betray their mandate to us.
25.	At the beginning of our work we cannot fail to note the paradoxical position in which the world finds itself today. Although we have certainly made the most extraordinary scientific and technical advances from which the greatest happiness and well-being could be derived, humanity has never felt a greater threat of immediate destruction than it does todays It almost seems as though man's conquest of outer space can be accounted for by his desperate anxiety to flee from a house which is on the point of collapse.
26.	One of our main concerns should be immediately to face up to all the problems which constitute a threat to world peace. This is the preventive phase of our work, in which we must show a will to co-operate in order to reduce the present tension, to stop the armaments race, to end nuclear experiments for destructive purposes, to put an end to the cold war and to find means of agreement between the Powers primarily responsible for the fate of all.
27.	If we carry out this urgent task there will open up vast possibilities of fruitful collaboration for the constructive use of the immense potentials which science has placed within the reach of man. These include the use of atomic energy for creative human activities and effective co-operation between all the peoples of the world for the exchange of their material and spiritual riches, and so that they may render assistance to each other and forge closer political, technical, economic and social bonds.
28.	In this first phase, the United Nations emerged successful from a difficult test when, as the result of a unanimous vote at the third emergency special session of the General Assembly, a satisfactory formula was found for dealing with the serious situation in the Middle East. In the absence of a really permanent solution, however, equally serious conflicts are once again breeding anxiety throughout the world and darkening the future with further threats. Just as in the previous emergency the United Nations found a solution with the means at its disposal, so now we meat make every effort to ensure that it finds a satisfactory solution to the problems disturbing the peace and security of the world.
29.	Despite some criticism of its ineffectiveness, the United Nations continues to be the channel through which mankind must direct its efforts in order ultimately to achieve the lasting peace which it desires. The great majority understands this and the peoples of the world, conscious of the task entrusted to the United Nations for the maintenance of international harmony, place their greatest hopes in our Organization. One of the means which in our view would assist the United Nations in its task is a very considerable strengthening of the functions and authority of the Secretary-General who has fully demonstrated the effectiveness of his aid in particularly difficult situations.
30.	Venezuela is again ready to co-operate earnestly and with conviction as it did in the case of the Middle East conflict. We are fully cognizant of the limited nature of the effective action we can take on world problems; but we do believe in the force of our convictions, in our right to make our voice heard and in our duty to give the best of ourselves in defence of the principles to which we subscribed in the Charter, as those principles are our very own,
31.	Consequently, Venezuela will support any proposals which may guarantee peace with justice and will endorse any measure tending to promote not unilateral disarmament, which would lead to the subjugation of the world by any Power which might continue to maintain armed forces, but a general disarmament under international supervision. Venezuela will also agree to the suspension of nuclear tests, which may have irremediably serious and unforeseen consequences, provided that the suspension is brought about in such a way that it gives no advantage to any country or group of countries.
32.	Venezuela will apply scrupulously the principle of non-intervention, refraining from intervention in any form, because it is convinced that the strict maintenance of this principle is one of the main guarantees of international harmony. I refer to both armed and ideological intervention, whether in the Internal or in the external affairs of States.
33.	Armed intervention is the very negation of a principle which is basic to our manner of thinking and way of life — a principle which has been embodied in our Constitution for more than a century: the principle of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. My country cannot therefore support recourse to force either for the purpose of settling differences or for the purpose of Intervening directly in the internal or external affairs of any State.
34.	No less hateful and inadmissible to Venezuela is ideological Intervention which is closely linked with indirect aggression as it pursues the same end of subjugation, not by force of arms but with the more telling power of thought control. The Venezuelan people are independent by nature and by conviction, and would tolerate no foreign domination however subtle and intangible it might be.
35.	With regard to the creative task that devolves upon the United Nations in laying the bases for a better world, I can give assurance that the Venezuela of today will participate eagerly in any positive measures in which our co-operation is sought. One of the most important of such undertakings is the co-ordination of economic interests. My Government believes that the international community must press for implementation of measures designed to further such co-ordination, giving first priority to the needs of the underdeveloped countries.
36.	Economic and social development has become a matter of primary concern to all peoples. It should therefore be the unswerving aim of the United Nations to ensure that development in accordance with the basic postulates of human freedom and dignity. There should be no economic and social development which involves the sacrifice of those principles that are dear to all free men. Man’s fundamental rights should not simply be recognized in theory, but real bases should be laid for their effective enjoyment. There must be general agreement on these objectives to guide international action in this sphere.
37.	The efforts of the United Nations to promote the Industrialization of under-developed countries deserve the firmest support and have the unreserved backing of my country. Industrialization is the most suitable means for improving the standard of living of any people. The fears and reservations with which some economically powerful countries used to view the industrialization of under-developed countries have now fortunately been dissipated. This change in outlook is due to the increasing realization that industrialization increases the purchasing power of the people and that it widens the market for exports to the benefit of all. A proper trade policy which takes into consideration the pressing needs of our countries is also an indispensable requirement for the maintenance and expansion of our development plans.
38.	Although considerable progress has been made in analysing the problems of trade faced by the underdeveloped countries, we still have insufficient means at our disposal for rapid and effective solution of the various problems that may arise. Ways are still being sought to reduce excessive fluctuations in the price of raw materials. During the past year a great many countries, Including many in Latin America, have had to face serious economic difficulties as a result of the fall in price of basic products, which coincided, moreover, with a rise in price of imported goods. Such circumstances call for energetic remedial action.
39.	Another serious danger lies in the restrictive trade policies which highly developed countries may impose on the importation of our goods, A sudden drop in foreign currency receipts could produce serious disturbances in the economies of our countries and cause unemployment and poverty among the great mass of workers, disequilibrium in the balance of payments and a general decline in our industrial activity.
40.	Measures which are favourable to trade will always have beneficial effects on economic development. This presupposes wide-scale use of capital goods — equipment, machinery and technical supplies- which cannot be obtained by under-developed countries if they lack the necessary foreign exchange, the principal source of which is trade. It is also essential to foster the growth of foreign capital investment, both public and private. Domestic savings are not sufficient to give impetus to the full development of our national economies and in certain cases would be insufficient to maintain the present rate of growth owing to demographic and other social pressures.
41.	We therefore view with sympathy the efforts being made by the United Nations to face the problems of financing economic development both by public and private moans. In spite of its modest size and limited scope, we consider that the Special Fund, on whose final establishment the General Assembly will have to reach a decision during the present session, is a first step in the right direction. In this connexion we should mention an event of positive significance, namely, agreement reached at the Conference of the Foreign Ministers of the twenty-one American republics recently held in Washington regarding the urgent need to take initial steps towards the establishment of a banking institute especially designed for the promotion of our regional economy.
42.	Venezuela has succeeded in attracting a considerable volume of foreign capital which has contributed notably, and in an atmosphere. of co-operation and confidence, to our economic development. These foreign investments enjoy the same equitable treatment as is accorded to domestic investments. This has not been due and is not due to transitory political circumstances, but to the firm conviction of the Venezuelan people that such investments are a singularly important contribution to the proper exploitation of our natural resources. For their part, the investors have proved themselves worthy of the confidence placed, in them by the Venezuelan people by showing respect for our laws and institutions, by abstaining from interference in our domestic affairs and by showing a willingness to co-operate in the achievement of such plans as are likely to assist in raising the standard of living of our people. Countries which export private capital could further contribute to an Increase in investments through adopting measures to encourage investors; among these a place of primary importance should be given to acceptance of the fiscal policy principle - recommended on many occasions by the Economic and Social Council and by the General Assembly — that profits accruing from such investments should be taxed only in the producer country.
43.	In the social sphere, particularly in connexion with the international covenants on human rights, I must confess that Venezuela views with discouragement the marked contrast between the number of statements on the subject and the slow pace at which these covenants are coming into force. In fact, the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Paris will fall on 10 December 1958. The most solemn and significant action which could be taken to commemorate that date would be to embody those principles in a formal undertaking. Indeed, the day when the United Nations succeeds in guaranteeing respect for the basic human rights by giving force of law to the covenants, it will have achieved one of its finest and most fruitful aims.
44.	Smother principle which is historically identified with the Venezuelan nation and, which will always receive our support is that of the self-determination of peoples, the practical application of which carries with it the elimination of all vestiges of submission or dependence. This principle will become effective when, it is finally recognized that the colonial system is as anachronistic and absurd in international relations as is slavery in relations between individuals.
45.	I have spoken frankly, as befits the delegation of a country which today addresses this world forum with its head held high, and I have stated the position of my Government on some of the problems which will occupy the attention of this Assembly. The position of my Government can be summed up as follows: maintenance of the rule of law in international relations and promotion of co-operation between peoples in all spheres of activity.
46.	My country’s attachment to the rule of law is not merely theoretical. It is something vital to our survival. We have neither nuclear weapons nor powerful armies nor inexhaustible economic resources. We have, however, for the protection of our sovereignty and national heritage a more noble and effective means of recourse than that which we may hope to derive from our limited forces: this is the practical application and observance of the principles of law. This we shall defend unhesitatingly whenever we see it endangered.
47.	In the sphere of international co-operation we are prepared, moreover, to promote any measures which tend to bring peoples together, to improve their knowledge of each other and to foster malarial, spiritual and technical exchanges. In these spheres, where the work of the United Nations has been and still is so fruitful, Venezuela will continue to participate with growing interest.
48.	I am convinced that this line of conduct is entirely in keeping with the principles underlying the Organization of American States. These include: the supremacy of law, the principle of non-intervention, the peaceful settlement of disputes, mutual respect between members, and co-operation of all for the benefit of each and for the good of the community to which all members belong.
49.	Venezuela therefore does not stand alone. In speaking to this Assembly, I am convinced that my words will echo with a familiar ring among a group of sister nations which share our concerns and harbour the same hopes as ourselves. Ours is a community which has succeeded in achieving within itself mankind's ancient ambition to live in peace and to prosper through work. It is for that reason that we are proud of the designation "Now World" given to our region. May God grant that in the face of the grave perils that threaten us that same spirit will animate all the Member countries of the United Nations so that they too may truly claim to be "United".
