I consider it a great honour and privilege to share with you the opportunities and responsibilities of the United Nations on this momentous occasion. This world Organization embodies the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the world for peace, prosperity and prospects of a better and more fruitful life, It is our task to reaffirm and to help realize the aims and purposes which are expressed in the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations with a degree of eloquence that only the urgent desire of a generation which had suffered the scourges of two world wars could formulate. It is for us, the representatives of Members of the United Nations, never to become oblivious to the sufferings and experiences which created the urgent desire to pursue the aims and the purposes of the United Nations. We must solemnly rededicate ourselves every day in discharging our functions. We must pledge ourselves to serve humanity. We must persist in our efforts in searching for ways and means of preserving peace. We must promote and safeguard the freedom of individuals and nations and relieve the stark poverty and conditions of starvation which unhappily is the lot of a great segment of the human race.
54.	In order to accomplish these ends, we must push forward the cultural, economic and social development of the under-developed areas of the world through the aid and assistance of the United Nations in all its phases. In the realization of these aims and objectives, happily the moral duties of the peoples of the United Nations, for which their collective conscience acts as their guide, coincides with their collective practical self-interest.
55.	Peace with freedom is the prime requisite and the essential and critical condition for nations as well as for individuals in order that they may fully develop their mental, moral and physical potentialities and resources for producing good and desirable results. Only in a world political atmosphere which is free from suspicion, tension and fear of international conflicts and struggles can the fullest development of human and material resources of any nation, and especially of the lesser developed nations, be achieved. It is the solemn duty of the Member nations and their representatives here to search and find ways and means of allaying suspicion and fear among nations and to restore confidence in the ability of this Organization to preserve peace and promote freedom — the necessary conditions for the alleviation of misery, poverty, ignorance and disease in this world.
56.	Peace and security must be established on the firm foundations of equality and justice, No self-serving formula of established interests should obscure the issue of the aspirations of the peoples for individual freedom and national independence. In our search for peace, no differences in ideologies or political and economic doctrines, ho differences in faiths and professed beliefs should be allowed to stand in the way. The dangers are so great that no failure can be admitted. The very survival of the human race is at stake. The survival of the human race must have precedence over any narrow national aspirations or ideological issues. We must persist in our hope and work during the session of the General Assembly for the adoption of effective measures to reduce suspicions and fears among nations. We must promote the realization of the aspiration for personal freedom and national independence of the peoples who are still deprived of those basic elementary human rights. We must formulate and adopt effective measures to preserve peace. We must provide favourable conditions for the fullest utilization of technical assistance and find the funds so necessary for development in the under-developed areas of the world.
57.	I am sure that our collective dedicated efforts will move aside the apparent mountains of obstacles which seem to lie in the way. I am sure that with our collective dedicated efforts, even in this seventh session of the General Assembly we may be able to take important steps towards the realization of our noble and useful goals.
