When, toward the end of the Second World War, the representatives of some fifty different peoples gathered in San Francisco to establish the foundations of lasting peace, they laboured under the definite conception that the United Nations could attain its objective only in so far as the internal order of things within each Member State would be in harmony with the lofty ideals of our Organization. The signatories pledged themselves “to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom”.
2.	It is therefore with legitimate pride that the Egyptian delegation presents itself today before the seventh session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and states that, by its political and social revolution, started in July 1952, Egypt has now fully carried out that pledge and has assured the welfare and self-respect of its citizens.
3.	The radical changes in the political and social institutions of the country have been realized in an orderly and most dignified manner, without strife or bloodshed.
4.	One of the most important achievements in those fields has been the agrarian reform in favour of the hard-working Egyptian peasant. The new law has restricted ownership of agricultural property to 200 acres per owner, just compensation being paid by the State for the surplus. This broader distribution of landed property has drawn the different classes of the population closer together and has brought social and political stability into Egyptian public life, thereby affording encouragement to free enterprise and to the investment of foreign capital at the same time.
5.	Another highly important achievement is the agreement arrived at with all Sudanese political parties, affirming the right of the Sudanese to self-determination. It gives me pleasure to cite here the first three articles of that agreement, which has been communicated to the Government of the United Kingdom: “Article 1. The Egyptian Government firmly believes in the right of the Sudanese to self-determination and the effective exercise thereof in the proper time and with the necessary safeguards. “Article 2. To attain the above-mentioned object, there should begin forthwith a transitional period envisaging two objectives. First: to secure full self- government for the Sudanese. Second: to provide the requisite free and neutral atmosphere for the Sudanese to exercise self-determination. “Article 3. The transitional period, being a preparation for the effective termination of the dual administration, shall be considered as a liquidation of that administration. The Egyptian Government declares that the sovereignty of the Sudan shall be kept reserved for the Sudanese, during this transitional period, until self-determination is achieved,”
6.	Certain Middle Eastern problems for which the United Nation has so far been unable to find adequate solutions still constantly preoccupy Egypt and the entire Arab world.
7.	That is the case with regard to the disquieting situation of the Arab refugees. No plan to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East will be worthy of attention unless it aims at equitable and humane solutions of such problems. Under pressure from world political Zionism, about one million Arabs have been ruthlessly torn from their homes in Palestine. For the first time in history, the indigenous population of an area has been displaced in order that so-called displaced persons from other areas might be accommodated.
8.	Recently, the same pressure has been brought to bear upon the Government of Western Germany. That Government’s agreement to provide Israel, under the guise of reparations, with large monetary funds and enormous quantities of heavy machinery, which will be available for Israel’s economic and military potential, can cause no optimism as regards the prospects for peace and stability m the Middle East. The Government of Egypt views this proposed reparations agreement with grave concern. It is our firm conviction that Israel is in no way entitled to reparations from Germany on behalf of the Jews of the whole world. Israel has no more rights in this respect than would a Moslem or Christian country to receive reparations in the name of all Moslems or Christians throughout the world.
9.	Another disquieting situation bearing directly on the peace and stability of the Middle East is the one prevailing in Tunisia and Morocco. The struggle of the Tunisian and Moroccan peoples to regain their independence deserves the full support of the United Nations. In his speech before the General Assembly [392nd meeting], the representative of France only underlined his Government’s failure to recognize the inherent rights of the heroic peoples of Tunisia and Morocco. Perhaps unwittingly he sought further to aggravate an already tense situation. His speech does not serve the cause of peace in North Africa.
10.	This Organization is duty bound to give due consideration to what is going on in that part of the world. At solution must be found — a solution in conformity with the principle of self-determination and in the interests of international peace and security. The arguments advanced by the representative of France, together with the insinuations he saw fit to include in his speech, will be adequately dealt with in the First Committee. The justice of the case of the Tunisian and Moroccan peoples who gave their lives in two world wars for the cause of democracy has no dire need for propaganda from this rostrum.
11.	My delegation feels that the colonial spirit, which declined at the end of the last war, has again sprung up as the memory of common sacrifices has become fainter. This is shown by the manner in which the administering Powers interpret Chapter XI of the Charter. It seems that, by restrictive interpretations, they are endeavouring to make a dead letter of that chapter. They would be well advised in making their interpretations to look up such works as Oppenheim’s International Law or Kelsen’s The Law of the United Nations, It would also be of great interest in this connexion to refer to the statement made seven years ago, in San Francisco, by Mr. Harold Stassen, the Chairman of the sub-committee charged at that time with the task of drafting Chapter XI of our Charter. Mr. Stassen said: “It [Chapter XI] is only principles on paper. The test will be: do we, the peoples of the world, give it the life that sincerity in our future action can give it, and in that way do we make it really mean something to those millions of men and women and children throughout the world who do not now have representatives seated at these distinguished council tables of the United Nations?”
12.	The Egyptian delegation reaffirms its devotion to the fundamental principles established in San Francisco and its belief in the right of all nations to self- determination.
13.	It is a matter of deep regret that a tendency towards discrimination between races still prevails in some quarters of the world, in spite of the explicit provisions of the Charter.
14.	Still another source of regret is the arbitrary exclusion of many States from membership in our Organization, which can adequately fulfil its mission only if it is to be a truly universal institution.
15.	The Government of Egypt will always be ready to co-operate, within the framework of the Charter, in the enforcement of international peace and security. With open minds, we of the Egyptian delegation are here to combine our efforts with those of other men of goodwill.
