Panama, its people and its Government, which I have the honour to represent here, comes to Ibis seventh session with a message of brotherhood to the governments and peoples which compose this Organization. My country once again reaffirms its ever-growing faith in the fruitful efforts of the Assembly, which will certainly help to strengthen universal peace.
138.	Panama has followed with intense interest the great work of the United Nations. We know that the United Nations is working not only to banish the danger of conflicts and the threat of war but — and this is perhaps more important — that it is also adopting measures to help countries where health, education and the economy are backward, that it is leading them to security and prosperity. In this way the danger of war is lessened and at the same time these countries are helped to make a constructive contribution to international harmony. 139.	We realize that wars result from actions which are sometimes illogical and contrary to political factors which are already stable; at a given moment, these actions come into conflict with motives which are incompatible with them, thus upsetting the balance on which peace is based. One of the potential causes of disturbances is the social conflict, for it affects a part of mankind which is at a disadvantage as regards purchasing power.
140.	Panama, like the other countries of the American continent, is an ardent believer in the work of the United Nations in this important field. We in America can never say too often how particularly sympathetic we are to this aspect of the work of the United Nations. We are young countries, often under-developed, with requirements in the technical, particularly the economic, and also the social fields and we have very urgent problems which must be solved if we are to abolish anxiety, uncertainty and dangerous unrest.
141.	My country is also particularly interested in the problem of the admission of hew Members. Various methods have been considered at previous sessions of the Assembly and important decisions have been reached on this subject, but it seems that one point has not been given sufficient attention, namely, that it is the United Nations more than anyone else which stands to benefit by making it possible for all peoples anti governments to become Members of the Organization. The United Nations should always keep its doors wide open to all countries which pursue the same ideals and are prepared to uphold its principles. The real justification for the existence of the United Nations is that it should be an association of all the peoples and governments of the world, confident that their closer relationship and the mutual understanding of one another’s problems will tend to dispel dangerous antagonisms and to establish a real atmosphere of harmony. Panama is most anxious to co-operate in the solution of these weighty problems.
142.	My delegation has come to this session imbued with the most ardent faith in the work which is to be done. We are here united in the defence of a great cause, in the struggle for a noble ideal, in the attempt to keep aloft the greatest and the most sublime principle of human relations, that of peace with freedom. In these dramatic moments of history, we know that our labours are not in vain. Therefore, in expressing our good wishes for the success of this session of the Assembly, we wish to emphasize that, in our opinion, the effective and loyal co-operation of each Member in the solution of the serious problems now before the world will be a most effective contribution towards victory in the struggle against aggression and the maintenance of lasting peace.
