1.	I wish to extend to Mrs. Pandit the congratulations of the Philippine delegation on her election to the high office of President of the General Assembly. A difficult task lies ahead of her and she has our best wishes for a most successful term.
2.	On behalf of the Philippine delegation, I should also like to congratulate the new Secretary-General, Mr. Dag Hammarskjold, and wish him every success in his important work.
3.	Over the years tradition has sanctioned the use of this general debate as an opportunity for delegations to discuss international affairs and the foreign policies of their governments. During the past several days we have heard various spokesmen debate the fateful issues confronting the world today.
4.	We of the smaller nations in Southeast Asia must share the universal concern for peace. The reason is simple. In the past we have suffered grievously from war, and we would suffer even worse from the scourge of another conflict. But because we do not dispose of the physical power which in the end determines the outcome of war and peace we venture to speak only softly in the presence of those who do.
5.	This is one of the realities of the world as we know it. Nevertheless, the smaller nations need not apologize for their ambitions, their hopes and their aspirations, for when the problems of the world are viewed in the fight of their own radiant outlook, it is clear that they too have as vital a stake as any in the maintenance of peace.
6.	Therefore, if we speak softly here it is not because our peoples are any less deeply devoted to peace. It is rather because we cannot speak with the relative force of countless divisions, air armadas and atom bombs. We have behind us only the moral force which inspires the peoples of all lands to work for a life of opportunity, and to live and to fulfil their destiny in freedom and human dignity.
7.	We speak here for governments. That is our official duty. But we must speak also for peoples. That is our moral obligation. In the degree that we speak for both with equal honesty we shall help to bring this great assembly of nations closer to the high purposes for which it was established.
8.	When a citizen of the Philippines looks at the world around him, this is what he sees: humanity divided, in the midst of political and ideological conflict, faced with the threat of war and, in some cases, even engaged in actual war. Close to his shores he sees, first of all, the war in Korea, recently concluded by an armistice which up to now has by no means settled the major issues involved. But he knows that his country participated in that war and lost a number of its gallant sons, and that the families of the dead and wounded still grieve over their loss. He is also aware that his Government has spent substantial amounts from its limited budget and that today, even after the armistice, it is still bearing its share of responsibility.
9.	He sees a war in Indo-China, carried on by communist elements with foreign assistance, growing in scope and again endangering the prospects of peace in his part of the world. Right next door he sees Formosa, the last stronghold and hope of democratic China. Finally, at home, he is witness to a successful struggle being waged against communist infiltration, subversion and armed attack by indoctrinated groups of dissident elements, a struggle which in one way or another can be compared to the problems confronting many nations in the world today.
10.	This is what he sees in the Philippines and also in the outside world. That we should note with special interest the things that are happening in our part of the world is understandable. This is not necessarily a provincial attitude for, as we shall presently show, conditions in Southeast Asia represent the elements of the larger crisis that afflicts the world as a whole.
11.	The crisis in Southeast Asia is, as in all other cases, a multiple one. Politically, it presents to a larger or lesser extent problems of nationalism and imperialism. Economically, it presents problems in the struggle to overcome the after-effects of retarded economic development and the lack of industrialization, modern equipment and methods, fuller employment, better working conditions, and higher wages. Spiritually, it involves within the countries themselves social adjustment, the attainment of equal fights and political freedom, and the uplift of an increasing portion of the population which has heretofore suffered under conditions of misery and low standards of living.
12.	In short, the countries of Southeast Asia, which have developed rapidly along political, economic and social lines since the Second World War, are at this point endeavouring, despite a natural apathy engendered by the old system, to enable themselves to progress as rapidly as possible abreast of others. These are their aspirations in the material and spiritual fields.
13.	The complexities of power politics cannot conceal the justice of these aspirations. Southeast Asia comprises many lands rich in natural resources, and territories of great strategic importance, and peoples offering tremendous markets and reservoirs of man-power. This fact may be a significant consideration in the thinking and planning of the more powerful.
14.	But the cardinal fact about Southeast Asia and its peoples is that, having achieved independence and in some cases semi-independence through endless struggle and suffering, they are now making strenuous efforts towards social improvement, political stability, international recognition and greater participation in the solution of world problems, especially those affecting the area. Efforts are also being directed towards greater co-operation in all aspects of human life, increased trade, closer cultural understanding and co-ordination of defenses.
15.	Because the region is so vast, comprising more than half of the population of the world, and material progress has been slow and often beyond the reach of its peoples, all matters pertaining to Southeast Asia have the character of extreme urgency requiring the immediate attention of the world.
16.	Southeast Asia is often represented as a power vacuum. But it must be evident to all that it is a vacuum waiting to be filled only with a measure of security, economic development, and social justice. For this reason, Southeast Asia is an area of grave peril as well as of great opportunity.
17.	How serious the situation can be we are witnessing today. The old colonial system is passing away; a ruthless imperialism is struggling to encroach in the area. This is timed to coincide with the new political status of the peoples of the region. The powerful motive force of nationalism is being harnessed in many cases to the ulterior purposes of communist imperialism.
18.	The pattern is clear enough. The natural and inherent desire of the peoples of the region to keep and strengthen their political freedom and economic security is being subverted in order to achieve what, to all intents and purposes, is bound to be a hateful form of despotism, and this process may be observed in varying degrees throughout the countries and territories of the region. As a result, in the last few years some of these countries have been subjected to conditions of instability and war. Fortunately the process is well understood and the pattern of development is evident to all. Because we understand the scheme well, it becomes clear that we, as well as the other countries of the free world and the United Nations, should be alert.
19.	For deliberate acts of aggression, the countries of the free world and the United Nations have given and can again give the necessary and appropriate answer. This was given in Korea for the first time in history although, unfortunately, relatively few of the Members of the United Nations answered the call to repel the overt act of aggression. Nevertheless, it is now universally admitted that this action was a decided step forward in the operation of the system of collective security envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations. As a result of the United Nations action in Korea it is less likely that nations may henceforth commit acts of aggression with impunity.
20.	The ultimate answer to the communist menace, however, must be considered in terms other than those of direct military assistance. The solution must be worked out on the basis of a long-term generous programme of social, technical and economic assistance, to provide for the uplift and prompt rehabilitation of some of the peoples who are now plagued by low standards of living and economic under-development. Also, a more sympathetic understanding of their history, culture and tradition is of the essence.
21.	We in the Philippines have shared many of the benefits arising from our half-century of relationship with the United States. Our people have become imbued with the principles of democracy and of equality of rights and opportunity. Our association finally resulted in the grant by the United States of complete independence, in goodwill and good faith without any background of violence or serious misunderstanding. This strengthened the faith of the Philippine people in the democratic way by which other major problems can also be solved.
22.	What we are trying to do is to set forth the problems of the south-east Asian countries in the light of the world situation as it now exists. This is important when we take into consideration the large populations involved whose participation can be decisive in regard to the prospects of peace.
23.	The United Nations has been described as a revolution. It has also been called a substitute for revolution. It is, in fact, a place where the historical process, which has hitherto been left to chance, may be given direction and a measure of order. Here can be brought disputes and threats to peace which formerly would most likely have been decided by force. Here we have a planned programme for the development of peoples towards self-government and independence. Here a more positive attempt than heretofore is made to create a life of greater abundance and larger freedom for all peoples by methods of international co-operation.
24.	In all the things that the United Nations does or tries to do today Asia provides a good testing-ground.
25.	We in the Philippines profoundly believe in the purposes and principles of the United Nations. We shall continue to give our share of support to the observance of these purposes and principles. We still maintain that the area of gravest menace is today to be found in Southeast Asia. We must stress the point that the greatest efforts towards world peace must be exerted in this area.
26.	For this reason we see the necessity of a policy of close co-operation and friendly understanding among the peoples of Asia. We shall continue to be gravely concerned with the problem of peace in Korea and Indo-China. It will be our purpose to participate to the limits of our resources in all efforts to resist the fastgrowing acts of infiltration and subversion in our part of the world. We shall humbly endeavour to help promote better understanding in political, economic and cultural matters among the peoples of the region. We shall continue to support the efforts of the United Nations and the specialized agencies along these lines, we shall not falter in our support of programmes of technical assistance and in the concerted effort to increase productivity and to rationalize trade.
27.	Southeast Asia is an area of great trial for the United Nations. That trial is only beginning and the end is still far off. The outcome will determine whether political freedom, security and economic well-being will become a reality in the lives of all the peoples of Southeast Asia.
28.	The world is confronted with innumerable problems of a varied nature which have been accumulating since the end of the Second World War. For their solution the countries of the world must exercise patience and fortitude. They must, furthermore, be imbued with a sincere desire to work together. In this manner the high objectives of peace may be finally attained.