35.	For the eighth time in the history of the United Nations, the General Assembly is meeting in order to discuss and take decisions on many important international questions. World public opinion is following the General Assembly’s debates with keen interest. This proves that, in spite of the disappointments its work has caused so far, the peoples still hope that the United Nations will follow the path of international co-operation. These hopes are now greater than ever. Some signs of a relaxation of international tension have appeared. In the period immediately preceding this session, steps were taken by the countries which pursue a policy of peace, particularly the Soviet Union, to improve relations between countries and settle controversial questions by agreement. A certain decrease in international tension may be observed, which provides the opportunity for wider co-operation in the settlement of all controversial problems on the basis of negotiation between the parties concerned.
36.	The most important element in this relaxation of tension is undoubtedly the conclusion of an armistice in Korea. Such a step puts an end to bloodshed in the Korean peninsula and to the war which has caused so much destruction and so much suffering to the Korean people. The end of hostilities in Korea, after three years and thirty-three days of heroic resistance to foreign invasion by the small Korean nation and by the Chinese volunteers, is a great victory for the cause of peace. The armistice in Korea has eliminated the immediate danger of the extension of the Korean conflict which is stubbornly sought by those whose policy is based on plans of war and conquest. The armistice in Korea has led the peoples to hope that the way is opening towards the peaceful settlement of other controversial problems by negotiation.
37.	However, the United Nations has not so far taken advantage of the opportunities offered by the signing of the armistice in Korea. Instead of following the policy duly laid down in paragraph 60 of the Armistice Agreement, and instead of convening a broad political conference to decide upon the withdrawal of foreign troops from Korea and to create Conditions favourable to the unification and reconstruction of Korea and to settlement of the problems threatening international peace in the Far East, the General Assembly has attempted to impose upon the Governments of the People’s Republic of China and the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea a bilateral conference composed solely of the belligerent parties. The discussions during the second series of resumed meetings at the seventh session of the General Assembly show that this was done in spite of the fact that the majority of Members of the United Nations realized perfectly well that the problems to be discussed far exceeded the competence of a bilateral conference, a since it would be faced with international problems of such importance that only a broad and representative conference, organized on a high level, would be able to settle them. Even the invitation to the Soviet Union to participate in this conference was extended in such a way as to place that country in the absurd position of a belligerent State in Korea.
38.	The position of the United States delegation and of those who supported it directly infringed the rights of a number of Asian States vitally concerned in a peaceful settlement of the Korean problem and whose opinions should not be ignored. The Government of the People’s Republic of China, which, together with the Government of the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea, has shown so much good will and has tried so hard to reach an agreement, has not relaxed its efforts to bring about a political conference designed to settle the Korean questions and other controversial Far Eastern problems by negotiation and agreement.
39.	The communication dated 13 September 1953 [A/2469] from Mr. Chou En-lai, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, and the communication dated 14 September 1953 [A/2476 and Corr. 1] from the Government of the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea represent a new contribution by those governments towards the efforts for a peaceful settlement of the Korean problem. Such a contribution gave the United Nations the opportunity of returning to the only just path and presented our Organization with the duty of re-examining the question of the political conference as the USSR delegation had proposed. Such a duty is dictated not only by legal and formal considerations, but above all by an appraisal of the actual political situation. The General Assembly’s decision [440th meeting] not to include the item submitted by the USSR, delegation in its agenda was wrong and has not contributed to a peaceful settlement of the Korean problem.
40.	The changes which have taken place in the international situation, and which I stressed at the beginning of my statement, have been brought about mainly by the policy of the USSR, the People’s Republic of China and the peoples’ democracies. This policy is based on a willingness to co-operate with all countries and is inspired by the profound truth that there is no controversial question in international relations which cannot be settled by negotiation. Thanks to this policy, peoples look to the future with greater hope that international co-operation will continue to develop. The peoples of the world have more and more confidence in the policy of peace which is based on the unshakable attitude of one-third of the world’s population. They see in this policy the directing force of the struggle for the peaceful coexistence of countries, whatever their political systems.
41.	This policy is meeting with increasing understanding even in some of the ruling circles of Western Europe, which are seeking to remedy the situation in which their countries have been placed by United States cold war policy and its war preparations. Even the Australian representative [436th meeting] who, for reasons best known to himself, felt it necessary to pay his anti-communist tribute in out-moded formulae based on the alleged danger of communism, and who took the liberty moreover of inventing quotations from the great Lenin that were both false and libellous, was obliged to recognize that the peaceful efforts of the USSR constituted an important element which must be taken into account. The peoples of all continents, including the American people, realize more and more clearly that war is not inevitable and that peace can be safeguarded. These peoples are demanding that their governments should exploit every opportunity for peaceful understanding in order to stifle the smouldering fires of international conflict.
42.	The legend, cut out of whole cloth by the ruling circles of the United States, that the peoples are threatened by the Soviet Union, has hung fire. Peoples more and more clearly see where they must look for the real war-mongers. The peoples hate war; they take their stand against war; they reject the theory that the war potential or the economic potential of a country gives it the right to practise a policy of Diktat or of blackmail in international relations.
43.	These feelings become more and more obvious to those who really wish to take them into account. Mr. Ernest Weir, President of the Board of the National Steel Corporation, stated recently, after a tour of Europe, that the Europeans did not believe that the danger of war was imminent, and they were convinced that the time had come to approach peace in a positive way, Mr. Weir drew the logical conclusion that the United States should attempt to reach agreement by undertaking negotiations in the international field with an open mind and should be prepared to negotiate for peace on an equitable and honourable basis.
44.	Some signs of decreasing tension appear also in the field of international economic co-operation. In spite of the obstacles put in their way by United States ruling circles, commercial exchanges between the capitalist countries, on the one hand and the USSR, the People’s Republic of China and the peoples’ democracies, on the other, are developing. The last session of the Economic Commission for Europe, the Consultation of trade experts to consider possibilities of expanding East-West trade, held at Geneva, and the Regional Conference on trade promotion, held at Manila, have enabled direct contact to be made between representatives of the various countries, which thus reached common conclusions on the need for extending exchanges between States, whatever their economic systems. New trade agreements have been concluded, such as that between the Soviet Union and France and several other countries. These agreements are profitable for both parties and to a certain extent reduce the consequences of the artificial restrictions which weigh heavily on the countries whose governments have submitted to the United States policy .of economic discrimination.
45.	The signs of a decrease in international tension prove the weakness of the policy of force and Diktat in international relations. Indeed, the Korean war has shown not only that a people struggling for their freedom are invincible, not only the heroism of the Korean people and the Chinese volunteers who, defending the freedom of Korea, have won the gratitude of the Asian peoples and of all peace-loving men and women, but also that the policy of force does not pay and that eventually it always turns against its exponents. This truth is obvious in spite of all the attempts which have been made, and are still being made by certain delegations from this rostrum, to camouflage United States intervention in Korea as a peaceful action of the United Nations. The policy of force is going through an acute crisis because its advocates lack the support of their own people and still more that of the other peoples they are attempting to subordinate-to their Diktat under the pretext of defending them against a non-existent danger from the Soviet Union. This failure of the Atlantic policy of force is apparent to any serious observer of the attitude of United States governing circles. I shall not quote the many statements on this subject which derive from various sources close to the ruling circles of United States foreign policy. I shall confine myself to quoting from a statement published in the Saturday Evening Post, to the effect that the peoples of the world, both the former enemies and the former allies, can no longer be prevented from acting in conformity with their interests, and that the United States can no longer hope to compel them by threats and corruption to act as if this were not the case.
46.	The Polish people, after the terrible destruction inflicted on their country by the fascist aggressors, are now experiencing a period of expanding economic, social and cultural life. The Polish people, who are making every effort to improve their social welfare and raise their cultural standards, are following the development of international events closely. They confidently support any plan designed to strengthen peace. For the Polish people, peace means the opportunity to continue their work of establishing solid bases for the well-being of present and future generations in the People’s Republic of Poland.
47.	However, the profound satisfaction which the Polish people experience at each sign of decreasing international tension, cannot blind them to the fact that areas of tension still exist and that attempts are still being made to poison relationships between nations, while the constant efforts of peace-loving peoples are directed towards the settlement of controversial questions. Their attention cannot be diverted from the fact that the Atlantic pact of aggression still exists and constitutes the main threat to international peace and security. For that reason, in speaking of the prospects of easing tension, I feel it essential at the same time to stress here that we must not close our eyes to the fact that those who are adept in the policy of force are not only avoiding negotiation, but are also seeking by every possible means to increase tension and to poison relations between the nations.
48.	Foremost among the manoeuvres of the forces of aggression which seek to maintain international tension are the attempts, of 'which I have already spoken, to sabotage the armistice and to prolong the war in Korea. The advocates of the policy of aggression are also trying to create new centres of international conflict in Europe. In the first place, we must mention the well-known provocation which occurred in Berlin on 17 June 1953, and which was obviously designed to create a centre of conflict in the heart of Europe. The complete failure of this escapade, organized by the imitators of Syngman Rhee and their protectors, has not led to any decrease in attempts at provocation.
49.	In the history of international relations, there is no example of diversionist activities on so large a scale as those now carried out by the forces of imperialist aggression. The United States ruling circles have included this policy of diversion and provocation against other countries in their national programme and funds have been officially appropriated for this purpose in their budget. With this money they hope to buy the dregs of society and enrol them in the struggle against their own peoples. By means of terror and blackmail, attempts are being made to induce weak and hesitating individuals to betray their homeland. Also as part of this scheme devised by the United States Government, a campaign is being organized through the broadcasts of the Voice of America and of so-called free Europe, a campaign of perfidious lies, incitements to riot, completely unfounded stories of so-called revolts and so on.
50.	In these circumstances, what value is there in the words spoken by Mr. Dulles from this rostrum [434th meeting], claiming that the United States does not wish to export revolution? It is obviously difficult to suspect the United States of wishing to export revolution, but it is obvious that it is exporting counter-revolution, terror, sabotage and other means of pressure against the peoples who have rid themselves once and for all of capitalism. These circles dream of destroying the internal unity of the peoples of the Soviet Union and the peoples’ democracies. These are vain hopes, however. Peoples who have won their freedom will not allow it to be snatched from them. Vain also are the hopes of the enemies of peace - that dissensions will arise among the countries which are on the side of peace. The friendship of peoples pursuing the same objective is based on the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and disinterested mutual aid and it is unshakable.
51.	The Polish people are carefully watching those who are scheming against peace. They must attach particular importance to the fact that in Western Germany the same forces which so recently were sowing destruction and death in Poland and other European countries are raising their heads again with ever greater audacity. These same forces, which only recently organized the bloody war against Poland and the other peoples of Europe, have now been promoted to a directing role in the new conspiracy against the peoples, disguised under the name of European Defence Community. Former SS generals are preparing to play a prominent part in the so-called European army and one of them, Gilles, has stated, according to Le Monde, that the Wehrmacht and the Waffen SS are the real precursors of European defence.
52.	In his statement, the United States representative attempted in vain to reassure his Western European allies, who are the western neighbours of Germany, about the consequences of the revival of German militarism. The peoples of Europe, who struggled against the Hitlerian hordes during the Second World War, now watch with increasing concern the maintenance of the division of Germany and the support given to German militarism, which is openly developing into a programme of conquest and annexation in Eastern and Western Europe up to and beyond the frontiers of Hitler’s great Reich. How can we accept as being in good faith Mr. Dulles’ statement that the United States Government desires the unification of Germany when he clearly interfered in that country’s domestic affairs on the eve of the West German elections and announced his support for Mr. Adenauer, the advocate of the forces of militarism and revenge? In exchange for this support, Mr. Adenauer made a statement, after the elections, favouring a policy which would lead to the aggravation of international tension. He spoke in favour of the concept of what he calls the “liberation of other nations”, which in reality is nothing more than the old Hitlerian policy of conquest and revenge. He also spoke against the peaceful unification of Germany.
53.	The Polish people, who have a common frontier of peace with the German people along the Oder-Neisse line, are keenly interested in the unification and peaceful development of Germany. Poland, which is united by friendly relations with the German Democratic Republic, wishes to live in peace with the entire German people. It recognizes the legal right of the German people to a united, sovereign and democratic State. The unification of Germany on a peaceful and democratic basis, as defined in the Potsdam decisions by the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France, is the only path to be followed for the settlement of the German problem in accordance with the interests of the European peoples, including the German people themselves. This is the path indicated by the USSR Government’s proposal for the reconstruction of. a united, peaceful and democratic Germany. The conversations held recently between the USSR Government and the Government of the German Democratic Republic prove the realism of the Soviet proposals and show that the USSR Government is ready immediately to undertake the steps essential to the signing of a peace treaty with Germany.
54.	I would emphasize that it was in the same spirit that the Polish Government, in agreement with the Soviet Union, recently renounced, as from 1 January 1954, the share of reparations still due to Poland. The Polish Government has made its contribution to the settlement of the German problem by developing genuinely peaceful and friendly political, commercial and cultural relations with the German Democratic Republic. The Polish Government is willing to go on contributing to a peaceful settlement of the German problem based on the conclusion of a peace treaty with Germany and the establishment of a united, peaceful and democratic Germany.
55.	One of the chief causes of anxiety and international tension is still the policy of an unrestrained armaments race pursued by the United States and, under pressure from that country, by the other countries of the Atlantic bloc. One feature of that policy is the development of military bases for use against the Soviet Union and the peoples’ democracies, bases which the United States has supplied with weapons of mass destruction, including, according to recent Press reports, atomic artillery. In 1953, the militarization of the economy of the Atlantic bloc countries has continued and military expenditure has increased, causing economic difficulties. Real expenditure on armaments in the United States in 1952 amounted to over $43,000 million. The expenditure of the European members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization rose from $5,800 million in 1940-1950 to over $11,000 million for the financial year 1952-1953. The budget of the Atlantic bloc provides for large sums for military expenditure, to the detriment of social investments, housing, education and culture. In the name of a policy of strength, the peoples are crushed beneath the burden of armaments. The interests of hundreds of millions of human beings, of whole peoples, are sacrificed to the interests of a small group of monopolies which derive enormous profits from armaments.
56.	For example, the data published last July in the Economic Bulletin for Europe show that the level of consumption in the countries of Western Europe in the first quarter of 1953 was lower than in the first quarter of 1949. The indices of industrial production for the same period are also lower in some of the Western European countries than the corresponding indices for the same period in 1952.
57.	The situation in the under-developed countries is particularly hard. The fall in the prices of their raw materials has caused a marked decrease in their ability to import and thus has hampered their economic development. The imperialist Powers exploit these countries to the hilt in order to make the greatest possible profits.
58.	The armaments race organized by United States government circles — defended by Mr. Pearson, the Canadian representative, who portrayed them as angels of peace and leaders of the camp of harmony — is arousing increasing resistance among the peoples of the world. It is even meeting with resistance from the governments of certain countries which have been drawn into the policy of rearmament. It is becoming increasingly obvious that the policy of the armaments race has no connexion with national security and that the war psychosis is being provoked by forces which are attempting to replace a policy of international co-operation by a policy of Diktat.
59.	Politicians and journalists in the United Kingdom are becoming more and more convinced of the necessity of opposing American pressure on the peoples of Western Europe to adopt a programme of preparation for war and to shoulder an immense military burden which will only increase their dependence on the United States and result in a continual fall in their economic Potential. Statements made recently in the House of Commons in London furnish proof of that fact, as do certain resolutions adopted by the British Trades Union Congress.
60.	Large sectors of the French people are calling for an end to the policy which is placing France at the mercy of German militarism, undermining its political independence and destroying its national economy. For instance, Mr. Debre, a right-wing senior, published an article in the newspaper L’Information, in which he stated that he was opposed to the ratification of the agreements on the European army and stressed that the existence of that army would place France in an impossible and tragic situation. He asked what would be the purpose of the European army, which would in fact be a Foreign Legion, predominantly German and under American command, and replied that its purpose would be the conquest of the territories of the East. His conclusion was that that was a real nightmare.
61.	The appearance of these tendencies in Europe can no longer be ignored, even by such American politicians such as Mr. John McCloy, the former High Commissioner in Germany, who writes in his book, The Challenge to American Foreign Policy, that the growth of anti-American feelings in Europe has reached dangerous proportions and that one meets with these feelings among the masses as well as among the intellectuals. In another passage, Mr. McCloy writes that Europe, which is exhausted and which has suffered so much, cannot countenance the idea of a war and is afraid that the United States does countenance this idea.
62.	The desire for peace is becoming more and more widespread among the American people. We remember with what hopes they greeted the end of hostilities in Korea. One reason for the present difficulties of the United States Government in its foreign policy is the desire for a lessening of international tension which is manifest in American society, more and more hard hit by the consequences of the war policy.
63.	In these circumstances, when on the one hand there seems to be some prospect of returning to normal international relations and on the other there are constant endeavours to hamper co-operation and maintain tension, the USSR draft resolution [A/2485/Rev. 1] offers the United Nations new opportunities. It deals with all the essential problems of the present international situation and offers a practical and realistic solution which would sweep away all the obstacles to normal, peaceful co-operation. By continuing to press for a reduction of armed forces and the prohibition of atomic weapons, the hydrogen weapon and all other weapons of mass destruction, the Soviet delegation is once again proving the sincerity of its intentions and its great interest in the development of peaceful relations among nations. Today, when it is common knowledge that the United States has no monopoly of, or even superiority in, atomic and hydrogen weapons, the USSR still calls for the prohibition of those weapons and the enforcement of that prohibition, for the reason that it threatens no one and has no intention of attacking anyone.
64.	This attitude of the Soviet Union is the direct opposite of the United States position, outlined once again in the United States representative’s speech on 17 September [434th meeting]. Instead of specific proposals, we heard once more the old refrain about the need for endless studies and technical preparations. In practice, however, the governing circles in the United States continue the armaments race, threaten the world with weapons of mass destruction and wage a campaign of war propaganda for the purpose of sowing hatred among the nations. That is not what the peoples want. All mankind is demanding disarmament, the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction and co-operation among the great Powers. By adopting the Soviet proposals that all weapons of mass destruction should immediately be prohibited and that the prohibition should be enforced, that the great Powers should reduce their forces by one third, that the Security Council should convene an international conference on disarmament and on measures to abolish military bases on foreign soil, and that war propaganda should be condemned, the General Assembly could open a new era for the United Nations and lay the foundations of a permanent peace in order “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”, in the words of the Charter.
65.	The Polish Government attaches great importance to the United Nations as an essential factor for the maintenance of peace. To achieve peace, however, the Organization must get out of the impasse in which certain States have placed it and return to the path laid down by the Charter. Only then can it play an active part in the development of international relations.
66.	In order to do so, the United Nations must finally put an end to the ridiculous situation created by the fact that there is no representative of the great Chinese people among us. The fact that the People’s Republic of China is not represented here is a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and of the undeniable rights of the Chinese people. Moreover, it creates further obstacles to the settlement of the important problems of world policy, in which the Chinese people play a. leading role. The Prime Minister of India, in his speech of 17 September, said that it could not really be maintained that China was represented in the United Nations and the Security Council so long as it was represented by an envoy who could not speak on behalf of the Chinese people and had no influence in China.
67.	The United Nations must also settle the question of the admission of new Members, some of which have been awaiting admission since 1946. The United Nations cannot be universal in the sense intended in the Charter, it cannot perform its duties and achieve its ends, unless, as the Secretary-General pointed out in his report [A/2404], it abandons all discriminatory practices and admits to membership all States which fulfil the requirements for admission.
68.	The Organization’s work should be guided by respect for the provisions of the Charter. The cause of peace is not advanced by attacks on the Charter and attempts to revise it; they can only undermine the authority of the United Nations and the confidence it inspires.
69.	One of the Organization’s principal tasks is to contribute to the development of international trade and the abolition of discriminatory barriers. The United Nations can make a practical contribution to the stabilization of international trade. Moreover, it should develop the economies and the cultural value of the under-developed countries. The purpose of that endeavour should be to strengthen the political and economic independence of those countries, not to mask the selfish political ends of some States. At the sixteenth session of the Economic and Social Council [729th meeting], the Polish Government announced what financial contribution it was prepared to make to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance; it is convinced that co-operation among nations in that respect can be an important factor in the progress and development of international economic co-operation.
70.	It is also the Organization’s duty to encourage the aspirations of the dependent peoples who want their freedom, and to oppose any attempt to strengthen the colonial regime. In the name of the principle of respect for the right of all peoples to self-determination, which is enshrined in the Charter, the General Assembly should denounce all practices likely to maintain colonial oppression; it should help the oppressed peoples in their righteous struggle for independence. The Polish people, who fought for their freedom for over a hundred years and have now attained it, sympathize with the dependent or semi-dependent peoples in their struggle for national liberation and offer them its warm support.
71.	I have devoted much of my speech to the principles of peaceful international co-operation because they constitute the foundation of the Polish Government’s foreign policy. By their creative and peaceful labour, the Polish people give constant evidence of their unalterable wish that peace should be maintained. Engrossed in our peaceful work, we are building and starting new industries and manufacturing products that we did not make before the war, such as merchant ships, tractors, motor-cars, machine-tools, power plants and synthetic fibres. We are building workers’ dwellings, schools for all children of school age, day nurseries, infant schools, hospitals, sanatoria and rest homes. By the combined effort of the whole people, we are rebuilding Warsaw, our beautiful capital, and other towns that were badly damaged during the last war. We are increasing the number of higher schools, which are attended by four times as many students as before the war. The budget of the People’s Republic of Poland is one of construction and peaceful development. Fifty-one per cent of the budget is devoted to developing the national economy and about 25 per cent to financing the social and cultural services. Our Government’s chief concern is the well-being of the workers.
72.	Poland’s participation in international trade —  which it is ready to go on increasing — helps to stabilize international relations. We are building and developing our country, not for the purpose of destruction but to live in peace. Our people remember the horrors of two world wars. The young people, beginning life with their hearts full of hope, and the mothers, who dread to see the happy smiles vanish from their children’s faces, are devoting all their creative energies to peaceful construction.
73.	The Polish Government’s foreign policy proves its unshakable attachment to the cause of peace. We have-"supported all efforts within the United Nations to reach a peaceful solution of controversial questions. We have submitted proposals designed to dispel the threat of war. I refer in particular to the Polish draft resolution [A/2229] submitted during the seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly. We agreed to take part in two neutral commissions in Korea, convinced that in this way we could help to solve the Korean conflict. Poland is also taking part in the work of reconstruction in Korea and the repairing of the ruins resulting from the war. The Polish Government will continue to support any action which might lead to a relaxation of international tension.
74.	In the Polish delegation’s view, the change which has come about in the international atmosphere during the past year gives the General Assembly the opportunity to make a great contribution to the cause of international peace and security at the present session. During the eighth session, therefore, it will be our duty to neglect no opportunity of adopting measures likely to alleviate tension and to create conditions favourable to peaceful international co-operation. The Polish delegation, for its part, will spare no effort to contribute to that end during the present session of the General Assembly.