69.	I speak for a small country, Afghanistan, which enjoys friendly relations with all countries. Our peaceful policy is derived from our deep conviction that peace and friendship between peoples and nations are the only conditions in which we can live and work for a better future.
70.	Our friendly relations with those with whom we share the same ideology and way of life is a natural outcome of our aspirations. Our friendly relations with those whose ideology and way of life are different from our own are based on our belief in the principle of peaceful and friendly co-existence among peoples and nations of the world. It should be a matter of regret for all of us that we live in a divided world. In this divided world, however, we are associated with one and only one alliance, and that is the United Nations.
71.	Our intervention in the general debate is not merely to follow a customary practice, but it derives from the necessity of giving expression to the unbiased, impartial and independent voice of a small country. Whose experiences of the past, conditions of the present and aspirations for the future are typical of all small and particularly less-developed countries.
72.	The fourteenth session of the General Assembly is convened on an important occasion. Important statements have already been made. In all these speeches, a deep desire for peace has been most strongly emphasized. It is a most hopeful reality that the desire for peace is universal, knowing no ideological or political borders.
73.	Mr. Belaúnde, the distinguished President of the fourteenth session of the (General Assembly, in his opening statement [795th meeting] expressed the hope that this General Assembly would go down in history as the "Assembly of peace". As a representative of a small country I wish to associate my delegation with the hopes he cherished.
74.	Realizing that peace is in the custody of the big Powers, it is good to see that certain efforts are being made for lessening international tension. These efforts are a great source of encouragement to all peoples of the world, particularly those of the small countries. Not many events have been so warmly welcomed as have the direct contacts made by leaders of the big Powers. From this, one can derive the true meaning of the aspirations of the people of the world. We only hope that all those on whose wisdom the future of the world depends will be guided in their thoughts, their approach and their actions by unselfishness and a sense of responsibility, not only in their own interest, but in the interest of mankind as a whole.
75.	No peace, in our opinion, without the full protection of all rights and interests and the fulfillment of the legitimate aspirations of all peoples and nations of the world is peace. On all occasions this is the greatest and the most natural concern of the small countries, for the expression of which there is no better time or place than the General Assembly of the United Nations.
76.	However, we must say that we are not happy that certain issues which are not on the agenda of the General Assembly at this session have been brought up in the general debate. This has engendered a fear of the continuation of the cold war at a time which was hoped to be a turning-point towards its termination. We sincerely desire that such attempts will not be followed, and that our deliberations in this session will be positive and Constructive and will influence the international situation in bringing the cold war to an end.
77.	No small country can do more than express its concern over the regrettable international situation. Some representatives have stated, and correctly, that the contribution to the solution of world-wide problems by small countries is necessarily a modest one. However, we think that the voice of small countries in a democratic gathering of nations established on the principle of equality is not less than any other voice.
78.	We admit that there are small Powers and big Powers, small countries and large countries, but we do not believe that there is anything like a small or large nation. All nations are equal in their dignity and in their rights, not only here in the United Nations under its Charter, but everywhere and at all times. Therefore we hope that all small countries will realize more than ever their position, particularly here in the United Nations, and will exercise their right to make this Organization work for the welfare of humanity through their independent judgement of all world affairs.
79.	We are confident that with all the concern demonstrated by the big Powers about the welfare of the small countries, particularly those in under-developed areas, these efforts of the small countries will be most welcome. It is with this hope that we would like to state our views before the General Assembly.
80.	We have carefully studied the introduction to the annual report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization [A/4132/Add.1] particularly the part dealing with the role of the United Nations. We do not wish to express any disagreement with his interpretation of the role of the United Nations in the face of the developments and activities concerning international problems. We do not disagree, because under the circumstances it is a wise interpretation. But we shall not refrain from saying that we would have wished the circumstances to be different, so that this Organization could play its full and rightful role in the peaceful solution of all international problems.
81.	To be satisfied that a certain activity does not go so far as to abolish the aims of the Charter of the United Nations is not enough. What is required is the strengthening of the United Nations by increasing the confidence of Member States in the organization so that they will consider it the best place for the negotiation of all international problems with a view to reaching agreements which will have the support and consent of all nations.
82.	In an age when no nation remains unaffected by any event in any part of the world, it is wrong to think that international problems could be the concern only of a group of nations and not of a world organization, such as the United Nations, dedicated to their Solution.
83.	Processes exclusive of the United Nations can hardly be considered fully consistent with the aims and purposes of the Charter. It is not only the question of such processes which should be considered, but their results and consequences. These concern the small countries, which, with their deep faith in the United Nations, can place their hopes and their confidence only in this Organization. Therefore, it is not very easy to accept as a general rule that the extraorganizational solution of problems of world-wide interest concerning humanity as a whole can be definitely or completely free from implications which would impair the position of the Organization in principle,
84. Those who have the practical solution of the problems in their custody are obviously not in a weaker position within the United Nations, particularly if their desire to put themselves in a better position to solve a problem is in complete harmony with the aims of the Charter and the interest of the world as a whole.
85.	One of the most important questions which directly concerns the small countries is the question of a United Nations stand-by force. This question was raised in the general debate during the thirteenth session, and it has been touched upon in this session. We stated [755th meeting] that we had utmost confidence in the United Nations, and expressed the hope that it would become increasingly effective as an instrument of peace. But, we added that the question of a United Nations force required more careful study, particularly in the prevailing international circumstances, and that we should be most cautious in our deliberations on this issue, because any hasty measures in this area would involve dangers that would affect the Organization directly. This point of view of the Afghan Government remains unchanged.
86.	Moreover, we stated that the United Nations should deal with this matter only at the most proper time and after a thorough examination of the desirability of the establishment of such a force. In the course of the year, we have been convinced by the prevailing international atmosphere that the proper time has not yet arrived. Therefore we are not in a position to commit ourselves to the approval of this idea at the present stage.
87.	It is encouraging that the way for a fresh start in dealing with the disarmament question seems not to be considered closed. We hope that the General Assembly at its present session will express itself on the best method of this fresh start, paying more attention to the anxieties of all nations.
88.	Except for a hot war which will bring destruction to all, the cold war is obviously the greatest source of anxiety from which the small countries suffer more than anyone else. The continuation of the cold war, therefore, means the continuation of this suffering for us. The arms race does not only affect the economic and social progress of the small countries, but in the field of nuclear competition the small countries, which have almost no means of protection, are more exposed to the dangers which threaten the world as a whole. Therefore the question of disarmament is of much more importance to us in the termination of the cold war and the strengthening of hopes for a lasting peace.
89.	The Afghan delegation welcomes the spirit of the proposals advanced [A/4219] for complete disarmament by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. We think these proposals are basic and comprehensive, and we hope that their serious consideration by the United Nations will pave the way for more fruitful discussions on this long-standing, problem, which has a direct bearing on world peace and security. We hope that all States will judge the problem on its merits only, and will consider these proposals as an encouraging basis for the negotiation of this highly important and vital problem. The Afghan delegation would also wholeheartedly welcome any other initiative that would bring about a complete disarmament as soon as possible, or that would facilitate a general agreement on this most important question in all its aspects.
90.	While it is gratifying that the nuclear Powers have announced that the ban on the testing of nuclear weapons will be extended, it is regrettable that the complete cessation of nuclear tests has not been agreed upon. We hope that the General Assembly at its present session will emphasize the necessity of agreement on this point without any delay. The idea of stopping the spread of nuclear weapons should receive the strong support of all nations of the world, and should not be conditional upon anything, including a general agreement on disarmament, even in its most ideal form. The humanitarian aspect of the problem should not be overshadowed by the political differences which, however great they may be, are too small when compared with the importance of the preservation of the human race.
91. We strongly support the appeal of the African nations for the prevention of the intended atomic tests in the Sahara. This question is not only a source of anxiety for the people of Africa, but for the majority of the population of the world, and should be most seriously considered by the United Nations.
92.	The penetration of man into outer space and the use of outer space only for peaceful and scientific purposes should be approached with a universal outlook, which is not possible unless all developments are the sole concern of the United Nations.
93.	No Member of the United Nations, having a deep conviction in’ the right of peoples and nations to independence, can strike a happier note in this General Assembly than to speak of the progress made toward independence in the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories of Africa. We are looking forward to seeing the new States occupy their rightful place in the community of sovereign nations.
94.	This happiness, however, is a mere flash of light on the horizon of the lives of many peoples, which has been darkened for centuries by the deprivation of peoples and nations of their legitimate right to independence. The real day of happiness bas not yet dawned, and indeed cannot, until all peoples and nations, whose aspirations for independence are suppressed in many ways and forms, achieve their goal, and colonialism is abolished in all its forms, wherever it exists.
95.	The contribution already made by the new Member States in the United Nations leaves no doubt that the independence of the dependent peoples is not only the recognition of the highest aspirations of man for freedom from domination, but also that it benefits the peoples of the world as a whole. The unjust policies of certain countries must inevitably give way to the legitimate rights of the people for self-determination and independence.
96.	Gratification has been voiced for the solution of the Cyprus problem. We would like to associate ourselves with this expression. The solution of the Cyprus issue is an example of a constructive approach to complicated problems in the United Nations. The efforts made by the parties in this direction should be highly appreciated.
97.	We hope that a satisfactory solution of the West Irian question will follow as soon as possible,
98.	It is most regrettable, however, that the developments in connexion with the solution of the Algerian problem are still most discouraging. To most of us it should be surprising enough that while we hear lofty voices of peace, and hear of the desire to end the cold war, no encouraging concern has been expressed about the Algerian people and the hot war which continues there. The constructive approach of many Members of the United Nations has not received the unanimous support it deserves.
99.	We do understand the difficulties with which ye are confronted on certain problems, but it is regrettable to see that situations of greater importance are sometimes overshadowed, while attention is forcefully drawn to comparatively minor issues. The adoption of such a policy by an individual country in its own interest might be understandable, but is most discouraging when not abolished by an Organization like the United Nations, particularly on a matter of hot war. We hope that in this General Assembly where attempts made to thaw the cold war have been highly praised, more attention will be paid to ending the hot war in Algeria.
100.	The recent statement of policy made in Paris by the President of the French Republic has attracted the attention it deserves all over the world. We are confident that it will also receive the consideration of the Algerian leaders who have been so bravely fighting for the cause of independence of their country. Afghanistan has always supported the right of peoples and nations to self-determination and to independence everywhere., In this case also, we hold the same opinion. But we must add that the desire of the Algerian people for independence is clear, and their determination has been declared by the rightful leaders of Algeria. We do not think that the Solution of the Algerian problem should be based solely on the declaration of intentions by France. Whatever measures to be taken should be dependent on peaceful negotiations between France and the rightful leaders of Algeria, with a view to reaching a complete understanding on the restoration of an honourable peace and the realization of the legitimate rights of the Algerian people to decide their own destiny.
101.	In these considerations the United Nations should fully realize its responsibilities. We' should remind the General Assembly of the many outstanding examples of political arrangements after the Second World War, where the fate of peoples and nations has been at stake. We are particularly alarmed about Such situations when they arise because similar examples exist in our own part of the world.
102.	One of the most dangerous ways of solving such problems is through the partition of countries and their division, or the annexation of territories without the free consent of the people themselves. Such methods have always given rise to difficulties in the future which have damaged peaceful and friendly relations between peoples and nations. I do not think that there is any necessity to enumerate these examples. But we would like to state clearly that in the consideration of the Algerian question this point should not be ignored.
103.	Negotiations cannot be fair and just unless they are without restrictions and conditions, and in harmony with the dignity and honour of the parties concerned. It would, be most unrealistic to think that a war could end peacefully by ignoring one of the parties in the dispute. It will be premature to go further into this matter at the present stage, but we would like to state that the people of Algeria, who have struggled so bravely for their independence, will have our full support in the United Nations when this question is discussed.
104.	We have been deeply impressed by the concern shown for the welfare of under-developed countries by all those who are in a position to continue their assistance through international co-operation for the promotion of economic and social conditions in these areas. As a representative of a small country in a less developed area, however, it is our duty to draw the attention of the Members of the General Assembly to the fact that the appreciation of these gratifying statements has not been completely free from certain anxieties.
105.	Certain forms of international co-operation, being a direct result of political and military pacts and alliances, have caused serious tensions in these areas. We want to make it clear that we do not wish to criticize any policies of any individual country or group of countries in any respect, but it should not be left unsaid that when other countries are affected by such policies, they are forced to give expression to their anxieties in the interest of peace and the maintenance of friendly relations between peoples and nations. This becomes more important when we see that even some international bodies have also been affected by such policies.
106.	The impact of such policies, influenced by favouritism, has affected the progress of the less developed countries to a great extent, and has already disturbed the balance of positions among the countries of the region. It has damaged the principle of justice and. even equitable distribution of assistance to meet greater and more urgent needs in the case of certain countries. It has diverted the attention of these countries from concentration on the promotion of their economic and social conditions, in the direction of unnecessary measures forced upon them to meet the threats to their security with which they have been confronted.
107.	There is no doubt that the work of the United Nations in the economic and social fields, which is so often obscured by the political aspects of its activities, has taken on a new significance. The realization of the importance of the development of under-developed countries has led to intensified activity. But still the needs of the under-developed countries are enormous while the means at their disposal are so limited.
108.	The United Nations Technical Assistance Programme is rendering great service. The recently established Special Fund is making a good beginning on a new co-operative venture that holds out great promise for the future. However the need of less developed countries for a capital development fund is not yet realized. It is hoped that a capital development fund will be established soon, as this is the missing link in the chain of international financial organizations dedicated to economic and social progress.
109.	The increasing area of under-development is an additional cause for concern. The most needy countries are likely to be most affected by the new tasks the United Nations will have to undertake in new areas, unless additional resources are found. It should be noted that the sources of aid, old and new, seem to ameliorate conditions in countries which have already made great strides toward advancement, while the most needy countries find it difficult and sometimes even impossible to meet the terms of assistance. Thus while some countries forge ahead, others meet increasing problems in gaining assistance.
110.	On his return from a visit to various countries in Asia, the Secretary-General noted that although some improvement had been realized, the economic progress in under-developed countries was painfully slow. We deem it necessary to say that the examples of improvement are not a great source of encouragement, especially in view of the insufficiency of the response to the requirements of the under-developed countries and the lack of a sense of urgency in meeting these needs.
111.	The recent trips of the Secretary-General to many countries in various continents constituted one of the most useful undertakings of the United Nations, leading toward a correct understanding of real situations, particularly in the less developed countries. We hope that the Secretary-General will continue his policy of direct contact with the Member States, and that he will receive the co-operation of Governments on matters which will bring about more fruitful conditions for all. However, as long, as the present difficulties are not met, one can hardly hope that the goals of the organizations set up for these purposes can be achieved.
112.	The sincerity of all those countries whose delegations have expressed their interest in the promotion of conditions in the under-developed areas is appreciated, but more understanding of the points of view which can truly be presented by those who represent these under-developed countries is required.
113.	It is the small under-developed country which suffers most under the prevailing situation. Afghanistan is one of these small countries. Our backward condition, unlike most countries in our part of the world, is not the result of domination by others, but is the outcome of years of war against domination in defence of freedom, which has been preserved at all costs, particularly the cost of development.
114.	Our pride in this achievement is not lessened by the economic conditions in which we find ourselves today. We are determined to give the same energies now, if we are left at peace, to our economic and social development as we did to our political independence. It is a part of our determination to accept only the assistance which is truly devoted to the betterment of conditions within our country, free from any other considerations whatsoever. It is for this reason that the United Nations assistance is so desired, and the strengthening of this Organization has become our most sincere desire.
115.	The difficulties which confront the United Nations are great, but the hope of the peoples of the world is surely strong enough to overcome them. We hope that in this General Assembly, in the consideration of the reports that the Assembly will receive in these fields, due attention will be paid to these issues.
116.	In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to state that it is a great privilege to take this opportunity to associate myself with those representatives who have congratulated you on your election as President of the fourteenth session of the General Assembly, and above all, we wish that the hope you expressed as President of the General Assembly will be fulfilled, and that this Assembly will go down in history as the "Assembly of peace".