96. The fourteenth session of the General Assembly is taking place at a time when progress is being made in the efforts to give a new orientation to international relations and to put an end to the cold war, and to bring about an easing of tensions. In the opinion of the delegation of the People’s Republic of Albania, the United Nations cannot but be gratified by this state of affairs which permits it to take more effective action to attain the purposes and principles of the Charter.
97.	All these years of cold war have poisoned the international atmosphere and sown the seeds of distrust and suspicion among States. The arms race, especially in the case of nuclear weapons, has assumed fantastic proportions. The world has come to the edge of the abyss and the danger of a nuclear war with all its disastrous consequences is still not averted. The efforts of the instigators of the cold war, of the policy of strength and of aggressive blocs and bases intended to prevent the development and consolidation of the socialist countries and frustrate the struggle for national liberation of the dependent countries, have failed. The socialist countries, utilizing the vast possibilities afforded by their system and by fraternal mutual assistance, have achieved magnificent results in their economic and cultural development, at a pace hitherto unknown.
98.	The Soviet Union is in the forefront of scientific and technical progress. All mankind acclaimed the' launching of the first sputniks, the first artificial satellite of the sun, and the first rocket on the moon. These great achievements of the genius of Soviet men have inaugurated a new era in our knowledge and control of the universe, and have opened up brilliant perspectives of progress and peaceful co-operation among nations.
99.	The Albanian people, which has pursued the same path of struggle, hailed with enthusiasm the victory of national independence won by the many peoples of Asia and Africa which are now active Members of our Organization, and expresses its solidarity with the heroic struggle of the valiant people of Algeria and the other peoples of Asia and Africa which are still struggling against the intolerable colonialist system. We have unshakable faith in the victory of their just cause.
100.	During this period new problems were added to those arising from the Second World War, complicating the situation still further. The Soviet Union, the People’s Republic of China, the People's Democracies and other peace-loving countries have made sincere efforts and taken concrete measures to bring about a gradual negotiated solution of the outstanding problems, with a view to paving the way for the elimination of blocs and military bases and for disarmament and peaceful co-operation among nations.
101.	We note with satisfaction that these efforts are beginning to bear fruit, and that the Western Powers, having made a realistic appraisal of the present situation, the forces involved and the deep aspirations of peoples, are also turning towards negotiation and collaboration.
102.	The Four Power Foreign Ministers Conference held at Geneva, with the participation of the representatives of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, did not reach a concrete agreement on the problems discussed, but it did mark a notable advance towards understanding and the peaceful solution of the major problems of our time. The peoples expect that a summit conference of the same countries will lead to tangible results in this field.
103.	We believe that the exchange of visits between the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, Nikita S, Khrushchev, and the President of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, indicates a turning point in the present disquieting international situation. My country and its Government welcomed Mr. Khrushchev's visit to the United States as a victory of the forces of peace, and a historical event marking a new phase in international relations. In all parts of the world the visit of the Head of the Soviet Government and his talks with President Eisenhower are considered to be a useful contribution to the cause of peace and a most hopeful augury for the future. There is no doubt that President Eisenhower's forthcoming visit to the Soviet Union will serve to consolidate and extend the positive results already achieved in the efforts to improve Soviet-American relations and to solve the international problems still unsettled,
104.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania considers that an improvement in relations between the Soviet Union and the United States, the world's two greatest Powers, cannot but be welcomed by other countries, particularly the smaller States. The existence of friendly relations between these two countries is a guarantee of peace promising greater security for smaller nations, the easing of international tension and good prospects of abolishing armaments, which in various ways impose a heavy burden on the economies of every country. It is desirable in our view that such exchanges of visits should take place more frequently, and that summit meetings between the leaders of the Eastern and Western States should become a regular practice in international relations. It would be an effective method of arriving at mutually acceptable solutions of the disputes and problems which now divide the world. It is surely preferable to have patient and friendly negotiations rather than the threat of force, and conferences, even if they last for many years, rather than the explosion of a hydrogen bomb.
105.	We do not imagine that the distrust, the differences of opinion and the complexity of the problems left unsolved during the cold war will disappear overnight, but we feel justified in affirming that the time is ripe and the need imperative to make a new start in international relations. All nations hate war, whatever their way of life may be, and peaceful co-existence, that is to say, peaceful co-operation between countries, on the basis of equality, non-interference and mutual respect and advantage, is the only alternative to the threat of a nuclear war. The frantic arms race must give way to peaceful economic competition between the socialist and capitalist systems. In negotiations between States and their discussion of problems there must be a new approach, an understanding of the interests of the other party and a willingness to reach a solution. Reason, not force, should guide Governments and statesmen.
106.	The present session of the General Assembly has an important part to play in this connexion and will be a milestone in the history of the Organization. The remarkable statement made from this rostrum [799th meeting] on 18 September 1959 by Mr. Khrushchev, is rightly regarded as the outstanding event of this session. The extremely important programme of general and complete disarmament which Mr. Khrushchev proposed has been welcomed enthusiastically by all peoples and viewed with a keen and largely favourable interest by most Governments. Both the people and Government of Albania warmly welcomed and fully support the Soviet Union's programme of general and complete disarmament as a new and striking expression of the consistently peaceful policy of the Soviet Government, as the only effective means of breaking the present deadlock in international affairs, and as the best way to solve the major problem of our time, to free mankind from the fear of war and inaugurate a new era of peace and progress for all peoples. This bold and realistic programme, inspired by the highest humanitarian ideals and a sense of responsibility towards the peoples-, offers a complete and radical solution to the problem of disarmament.
107. The essence of the Soviet proposals as defined by Mr. Khrushchev is that "over a period of four years, all States should carry out complete disarmament and should divest themselves of the means of waging war" [ibid, para. 71]. They are proposals which could enable us to solve once and for all the crucial problem of disarmament, to ensure lasting peace and international security, to create a completely new international climate based on mutual trust, peaceful co-existence and unrestricted co-operation in the economic and other fields,
108.	What great things could be achieved for the welfare and progress of human society if we halted the arms race which drains our material and financial resources and the skills of our scientists, research workers and technicians, if, in a word, we disarmed! At a time like this, of inconceivable advances in science and technology and infinite possibilities for the development of productive forces, vast areas of the world are still without the basic necessities of life, and tens of millions of infants and young children die each year for lack of food and medical care. In every country diseases like cancer take the lives of hundreds of thousands of human beings each year. Even in the highly-developed countries there are shortages of houses, schools and hospitals. With the expenditure of only a fraction of the enormous sums devoted to armaments many of these problems could in great part be solved. The urgent problem of the under-developed countries, which is a matter of justifiable concern to the United Nations, could be solved by comprehensive and practical schemes instead of being the subject of interminable discussions and of half-measures; the level of living of the peoples everywhere could be raised considerably, man's work would be easier and human civilization would make greater progress.
109.	The arms race delays progress and causes tension, poverty and wars of extermination. General and complete disarmament opens up dazzling prospects of peace, security and happiness. This places a heavy responsibility on those Governments which persist in the policy of the arms race and gives tremendous significance to Mr. Khrushchev's proposals for general and complete disarmament.
110.	There are those who maintain that the establishment of the Ten-Power Committee recently agreed upon by the great Powers might remove the disarmament problem from the purview of the United Nations, but the Soviet Union's proposals, made before the General Assembly by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union himself, not only demonstrate the Soviet Union's attachment to this Organization and the importance it attributes to it, but also offer the Organization an opportunity of resolving the basic problem of our age and of achieving thus the principal aim of the Charter: "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
111.	My Government considers the establishment of the Ten-Power Committee an important step towards the solution of the disarmament problem. The great merit of the programme of complete disarmament submitted by the Soviet Union in the statement in the Assembly is that it breaks the deadlock reached after fourteen years of discussion of the problem and points the way to a concrete and radical solution. Hitherto the Western Powers have frequently tried to justify their refusal to consider the many proposals and concrete measures suggested by the Soviet Union for the solution of the disarmament problem by raising the question of control. It is a well-known fact that the Soviet Union has always had a realistic and constructive approach to this question. It is obvious that there cannot be control without disarmament; what is needed is controlled disarmament. The Soviet programme of general and complete disarmament provides a complete answer to this question also, since it proposes the establishment of an international control organ in which all States would participate. The system of control envisaged will cover all disarmament measures and will operate in conformity with the stages in which disarmament is general and complete; then, once it is accomplished, control will also be general and complete.
112.	The Soviet Government, realizing that a certain time will be required to work out the programme, and for the necessary negotiations, suggests that in the meantime a series of suitable partial measures should be taken to ensure disarmament and to strengthen security. World opinion expects that all Member Governments will give their support to this programme, which is the major question at the present session of the General Assembly and on which the attention of all nations is focused. The attitude of each Government to the problem of disarmament is the touchstone of its devotion to the cause of peace.
113.	We know that in the United States and other NATO countries there are strong forces which oppose the relaxation of tension and wish to continue the cold war and the arms race, but they cannot stop the march of history. In the new climate of relaxation we believe that if the great Powers truly demonstrate the same desire for agreement as the Soviet Union and other socialist countries it will not be difficult to agree as a first step upon the partial measures for disarmament proposed by the Soviet Union. Moreover, as every prerequisite now exists, it is to be hoped that the United States will abandon its negative attitude in the three-Power Conference at Geneva and that an agreement on the complete and unconditional cessation of atomic and hydrogen weapon tests will be concluded in the near future.
114.	The French Government's proposal to hold nuclear tests in the Sahara at the very moment when total cessation of these tests has become an urgent necessity has aroused indignation in the countries of Africa and among all peace-loving nations. As a Mediterranean country with a direct interest in this matter, the People's Republic of Albania wishes to state that it opposes the proposed tests in the Sahara and supports the attitude of the African countries in the matter. It hopes that the French Government will not proceed with a pernicious project, which has provoked such a well-founded reaction.
115.	The cause of peace is extremely dear to the people and Government of Albania and they stand wholeheartedly behind it. In the past, my country has greatly suffered because of wars. On 7 April 1939, it became one of the first victims of fascist aggression. For centuries, the Albanian people, at the cost of untold sacrifices, has fought foreign invaders and national tyrants for the sake of liberty, independence and social justice. These objectives were not fully achieved until fifteen years ago, when, on 29 November 1944, the Albanian people triumphed in their struggle for national liberation against the Italian fascist and German nazi invaders and popular democratic rule was established in their country,
116.	Fifteen years is not a long period in the history of a nation, but for the Albanian people these last fifteen years mark an historic epoch — the transition from occupation to independence, from tyranny to liberty, from darkness to light. Once a semi-dependency of the imperialists, Albania has now become an independent and sovereign socialist State with a sound international standing. It is a Member of the United Nations and maintains normal relations with many countries. The Albanian people are proud of the unshakable friendship which links their country to the Soviet Union, the People's Republic of China and the other People's Democracies. In the great united family of free and equal socialist countries, and in alliance with the Soviet Union and the other signatories to the Warsaw Treaty, which is a powerful instrument of security and peace, the Albanian nation has regained its national dignity and obtained security for its sovereignty, for the building of socialism and for a prosperous future.
117. Before liberation, Albania was a poor, backward agrarian country, without industry and modern communications, and with an illiteracy rate of 85 per cent. What is the situation now?
118.	As I do not wish to take up the time of the General Assembly, I wish merely to say that in less than fifteen years that deplorable situation has been banished forever, thanks to the efforts and self-sacrifices of our people and our Government as well as to the generous and disinterested help of the Soviet Union and other friendly countries. We have, for instance, established industries and a modern communications system and undertaken the exploitation of oil wells, chromium, ferro-nickel and copper mines for our own benefit. Industrial production is more than eighteen times higher now than it was in 1938 and is increasing at the same pace. Agriculture, which has been mechanized and collectivized to a great extent, now covers a larger area and produces about twice as much as it did before the war. In 1958, the national income was three and a half times greater than in 1948. Illiteracy has been abolished. There is a primary and secondary school system throughout the country, and we have founded our own university. At present, more than 500 young people complete advanced studies each year, whereas during the last fifteen years of the former regime, a total of only 300 persons were able to obtain a higher education. At present, one-fifth of the population is attending school. Art, culture, and science are flourishing.
119.	The people's standard of living is much higher than before the war. Unemployment is unknown, and there are nine times more workers than there were in 1938. Salaries and pensions have been raised repeatedly, while prices have been decreasing yearly. A complete system of social insurance protects workers and their families. Less than 3 per cent of all revenue in the national budget is derived from taxation of the people. A significant indication of the rise in the standard of living is the annual growth of the population: the birth rate, which was 16.9 per 1,000 in 1938, climbed last year to 31.9 per 1,000.
120.	The Albanian people are preparing to celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of their liberation, and the great achievements of which they are legitimately proud. Socialism has completely transformed the face of our country and holds out hope of a glowing future for our people. The progress we have already made bears witness to the transforming power and superiority of the socialist system, for it shows that even a small country, once it is free of imperialist domination and exploitation, once it is independent and master of its national resources, can, with the disinterested assistance and solidarity of the socialist countries, safeguard and consolidate its national independence, develop its economy and its culture for the well-being of its people and become a factor for peace and progress.
121.	The path which we have travelled since liberation has not been an easy one. We have had to overcome the grievous heritage of the past and the appalling destruction of the Second World War and to restore our economy, while simultaneously frustrating the hostile intrigues and activities of certain foreign Powers who have spared no effort — though in vain — to overthrow the people's government and return our people to slavery. It is to be noted that the ruling circles of certain NATO bloc countries have still not renounced their foolish dream of putting the socialist countries back under the bourgeois imperialist yoke, and that the United States Government has not ceased preaching its provocative policy of so-called "liberation" with regard to Albania and other socialist countries. Only recently, the United States Congress adopted an insolent resolution along these lines as a contribution to the cold war. Is it not high time that these gentlemen understood once and for all that the Albanian people, as well as the people of the other socialist countries, have attained true freedom once and for all, that no force in the world could induce them to deviate from their freely chosen path of socialism, and that they will not permit anyone to interfere in their domestic affairs? Would they not do better to attend to their own affairs and to base their policy on existing realities rather than on their unattainable hopes? A realistic attitude on their part would be in the interests of their own country and in keeping with the principles of the Charter, and it would serve the cause of peace and international understanding.
122.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania remains faithful to its policy of peace and friendship with all countries and is doing its utmost to further the purposes and principles of the Charter. It is wholeheartedly in favour of peaceful co-existence and co-operation among all countries, regardless of their social and political systems, on a basis of equality, non-interference, and mutual respect and benefit. These are the principles underlying the relations which it has established with a number of countries and which it is ready to extend to others.
123.	By its policy and by its acts, the Albanian Government has always endeavoured to avert the threat of war and maintain peace. At the present time, it considers it essential to check the course of the "revanchist" German militarism which has made its appearance in West Germany and which constitutes the most serious threat to peace in Europe. My Government completely concurs with the proposal of the Soviet Union to conclude a peace treaty with Germany and to confer upon West Berlin the status of a free, demilitarized city.
124.	The People's Republic of Albania, which is particularly interested in safeguarding peace and friendly co-operation among the Balkan and Mediterranean countries, wishes to maintain and develop with all these countries relations of good neighbourliness and active co-operation in the common interest and in the cause of peace. Rightly considering that the establishment of United States atomic weapon bases and missile launching stations in the territory of neighbouring countries like Italy and Greece constitutes a direct threat to the security and sovereignty of Albania and gives rise to tension in this area, the Albanian Government has taken active steps to forestall such a situation. In the light of the agreement concluded between the Italian and United States Governments on the installation of such bases in Italy, the problem has become particularly important.
125.	During his visit to Albania in the spring of this year, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, Mr. Khrushchev, proposed the establishment, on the basis of mutual control, of a peace zone in the Balkan and Adriatic region where there would be no atomic weapons or missiles. This proposal, which was favourably received by most of the Governments and by all of the peoples of the Balkan countries was hailed as a great contribution to the cause of peace in this region and in the world. Only the Italian and Greek Governments took a negative position with respect to it.
126.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania expressed full support for the Soviet proposal, and indicated its readiness to begin immediate negotiations with all Governments concerned. It further stated that if such bases were established in Greece, the People's Republic of Albania would be obliged to take similar measures in its own territory in order to defend itself against this threat. Our attitude remains unchanged. The establishment of a peace zone in the Balkans and the Adriatic is still timely and in keeping with the long-term interests of all the nations of this region. We would like to hope that, with the change in the international situation, not only will such bases not be established in Greece but all existing military bases in foreign countries will be abolished.
127.	The Balkans used to be known as the powder keg of Europe. The People's Republic of Albania and the other People's Democracies in this region are striving incessantly to make the Balkans an example of cooperation and peaceful co-existence, an active an influential factor for the preservation of peace in Europe. The Albanian Government will continue to pursue its good neighbour policy and its efforts in this connexion. We have given our complete support to the proposal made by the Head of the Government of the Romanian People's Republic that a meeting should be convened of the Heads of Governments of the Balkan countries and that a treaty of mutual understanding and collective security should be concluded among the countries of this region. We still consider this a very timely proposal. We are convinced that, given good will on the part of all parties concerned, the Balkan countries will find the way to understanding and co-operation.
128. The items on the agenda of the General Assembly at its fourteenth session are numerous and call for very careful attention. Our delegation will state its position in respect to them at the appropriate time, but it would like to stress here and now that the most important problem before this session is the Soviet plan for general and complete disarmament. The peoples of the world are waiting for the General Assembly to reach a positive decision in this matter.
129.	We feel that the General Assembly should take active steps to further the thaw which has begun in international relations. We note with regret, however, that certain representatives are attempting to convert the Assembly into a bastion of the cold war. Thus, as a result of the negative attitude and the selfish designs of a single Power, and contrary to common sense, justice and the urgent interests of the United Nations, the question of reinstating the People's Republic of China in its rights in the United Nations has once again been postponed. Although we have already indicated our position [801st meeting] on this matter, we feel compelled to stress it once again.
130.	On this first day of October 1959 the Chinese people celebrate the tenth anniversary of the proclamation of the People's Republic of China. This event marked a turning point in the long history of the Chinese people and an important date in the history of mankind. On the occasion of their national holiday, I congratulate the great Chinese people, on behalf of the delegation of the People's Republic of Albania, on their splendid achievements in all fields and on their great contribution to the cause of peace and international co-operation, and wish it even more striking victories on the path to socialism. We believe that, both in international relations and in the General Assembly, the right course at present is to explore the points on which we agree and not those on which we differ. We should more than ever avoid any action which impedes such a course, as for instance the proposal to include on the agenda the non-existent question of Tibet, which constitutes gross interference in the domestic affairs of the People's Republic of China and a deliberate act of provocation. It is to be hoped that the General Assembly will refuse to play the game of the enemies of international co-operation and the easing of tension.
131.	The forces working to prevent the relaxation of tension and to maintain the cold war have provoked a state of tension in Laos and, to that end, even the Charter provisions relating to the principle of unanimity of the permanent members of the Security Council have been disregarded. Our delegation believes that the matter of Laos should be examined and resolved in accordance with the Geneva agreements of 1954, as was proposed by the Soviet Government in its statement of 14 September 1959 [S/4222].
132.	We consider that respect for the provisions of the Charter and existing agreements is essential to the normal functioning of the United Nations organs and to the attainment of its objectives. One of the principles on which our Organization is based is that of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of United Nations organs. For years, the seat of a non-permanent member of the Security Council belonging to an eastern European country has been arbitrarily occupied by representatives of other geographic groups. We believe that the rights of all groups, including those of the socialist countries, should be respected. The same principle should be observed with regard to the election of the President of the General Assembly at different sessions. Our delegation supports the proposal of the Czechoslovak delegation on this matter [A/4182].
133.	We welcome the proposal by the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic [A/4233] relating to the control of cancerous diseases, and we hope that this humanitarian proposal will find widespread support among delegations.
134.	I should like to conclude by expressing the hope that this session of the General Assembly, as a result of the spirit underlying its works and of the resolutions which it adopts, will contribute effectively to the elimination of the cold war and to the easing of international tension, and that it will go down in history as “the Assembly of peace”.