101.	Mr. President, may I offer you first of all my most heartfelt congratulations on your election as President of the General Assembly. Your personality needs no praise in this Assembly-, where your voice has so often been raised in defence of just and noble causes. Suffice it to say that the Argentine Republic also considers itself honoured by the election of so distinguished a Latin American to preside over our counsels. My country wishes to express the sincere hope that God may inspire you in the fulfilment of your difficult tasks and to congratulate its sister republic of Peru on the signal honour bestowed on one of its most illustrious sons.
102.	I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to our retiring President, Mr. Charles Malik, who so skillfully and tactfully conducted the discussions of the thirteenth session of the Assembly. The manner in which he discharged his high office during the past year confirmed the esteem in which he was held at the time of his election, and we wish to convey to him our appreciation and gratitude.
103.	The international picture before us this year has special features that should arrest our attention; certain of these features may be viewed with optimism, others with justifiable alarm.
104.	In the first place we must refer to the tension between the great Powers which, threatening as it does the peace and security of the world, concerns us all. It was therefore natural that public attention should be focused on the meetings to be held between the Heads of Government of the United States and the Soviet Union, following on the talks recently held in Europe between the principal leaders of the Western Powers. My own country is not directly concerned with the matters which gave rise to those meetings; but in view of our desire to preserve peace, on which the survival of human life on our planet may perhaps depend, we feel bound to express our views with regard to such talks.
105.	We are firmly convinced that negotiation is the right method for the settlement of international disputes, and we pledge our support to any measure likely to ease tension and provide a just and practicable formula for peaceful coexistence among nations. We believe that, to achieve such an end, there must be frank exchanges of views among the parties mainly concerned. We believe, moreover, that the value of these discussions will be in proportion to the strength of the countries taking part. We are well aware that, whatever our own preferences maybe, the existence of large groups of countries with vastly differing ideological and political Systems is a fact, and must be reckoned with an such. Negotiations and talks must therefore be accepted as the only means of arriving at formulae which would at least make it possible to establish a stable modus vivendi. With this idea in mind my delegation fervently hopes that such meetings may advance the cause of peace. We are convinced that, today, no nation on earth wants war, and any effort made to prevent it will have the support of clear- thinking and responsible people everywhere.
106.	Our sincere devotion to the cause of peace does not prevent us from expressing our solidarity with the policy of the West, to which we belong as much by tradition and origin as by deeply rooted convictions. In this connexion we cannot but be concerned at continuous efforts of certain international movements to undermine the institutions of free peoples. My country, like others in America, Europe and Asia, has felt the impact of such movements, clearly inspired by foreign influences. On the national level my Government has no fear of the consequences of this subversive activity, and is prepared to repress it energetically by any means within the law. On the international level, however, we feel impelled to voice a warning that the cause of peace may be endangered by these systematic disruptive activities. As we have recently seen, they are particularly dangerous in the proximity of the points from which they are generated and diffused, but we have all suffered their noxious effects to a greater or lesser degree.
107.	We must therefore point out that the first step in any genuine effort to establish a climate of peaceful coexistence must be the complete exclusion of all attempts to overthrow from outside the political and legal institutions of other countries. Argentina, as it has shown, seeks to maintain normal diplomatic relations with all countries in the world and to strengthen those ties by extensive trade, but such a friendly relationship can exist only if our sovereignty is respected and the integrity of our way of life is safeguarded. My country is, in particular, convinced that, when diplomatic representatives, instead of promoting good relations between Governments, act as spies and social agitators, they misuse their calling and, if their activities are continued, discredit the intentions of the Governments they represent.
108.	So far we have dealt with matters related to world politics. It may be asked whether a country with no direct interest in such questions is in a position to pass judgement on them.
109. Our answer must be an unqualified affirmative. We have already said any matter threatening world peace must be our concern, even if we are not involved in the conflict and are far removed from the scene of events. Thus we believe that the countries which form the Latin-American community have the right, like any other regional groups, to be informed and consulted on any issue likely to endanger world peace, such as, for instance, the vital question of disarmament. We do not wish to be assigned a passive role in the designs of others; we are and wish to be active participants in world affairs. We know the limitations of our powers and we know that individually not one of our Republics is comparable in stature to the great actors on the world stage; but the twenty nations of the Latin-American community, with their enormous expanses of territory, their vast potential riches and 200 million inhabitants represent a cultural and political unit entitled to have its say in world affairs. We do not aspire, of course, to the position of arbiters in those affairs, nor on the other hand do we wish to lag behind the march of events and to be informed of them after they have become accomplished facts.
110.	In the sphere of the so-called "colonial" problems the Argentine Republic reaffirms its customary support for the principle of self-determination of peoples. It therefore views with satisfaction the constant emergence of new and independent States and is in favour, as It always has been, of their admission to the United Nations. With regard to the resumed thirteenth session of the General Assembly, held in February of this year to deal with the question of the Cameroons, my delegation wishes to express not only its satisfaction at the achievement of a just settlement for the people of the Cameroons, but its appreciation of the magnanimity of France and the United Kingdom, whose impartial attitude made such a settlement possible.
111.	Among these problems, the question of Algeria retains all its urgency and will undoubtedly give rise to vigorous debate during the current session. Argentina deeply regrets the fact that it has not so far proved possible to find ways of restoring peace in North Africa. It hopes that the forthcoming debate and the resolutions to be adopted will promote progress towards agreement, instead of deepening existing differences. In that connexion we wish to remind the parties concerned that, although extreme positions may provide an outlet for the heightened emotions engendered by conflict, they are not conducive to the achievement of effective solutions.
112.	In some parts of the world, problems have arisen which involve important principles of international law, particularly with regard to freedom of navigation. As the Secretary-General has stated [A/4132/Add.l, p. 4], these are problems in which political and legal factors are very closely linked, precluding our taking a stand in the matter. This does not, however, prevent us from reaffirming our belief that, whatever the solution reached, free navigation on the seas and international waterways must be guaranteed, because this principle forms part of the common heritage of mankind.
113.	With regard to regional matters, the American republics have had to face delicate problems, mainly affecting the Caribbean area. These problems led to the holding of a meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Santiago, Chile, within the framework of the inter-American system. On that occasion, Argentina reaffirmed its support for the principle of non-intervention, which is the cornerstone of peaceful coexistence among States. It also expressed the hope that Governments would conduct their affairs with the greatest possible respect for rules of law and human rights. In order to safeguard the enjoyment of such rights within each State, it is necessary to create a world-wide climate of opinion, in which the systematic violation of these rights would be morally impossible. This would mean that neither public opinion nor Governments could view with sympathy or maintain friendly relations with those who consistently disregarded the sacred respect due to human beings as creatures of God.
114.	We do not believe, however, in the effectiveness of individual or collective intervention, and consider that armed expeditions or international police action may set dangerous precedents. What is done today, perhaps with the best of purposes, may serve tomorrow as a means of gratifying personal ambitions or as a screen for a covert desire for power.
115.	We cannot conclude this statement without voicing the widely held opinion concerning the need to revitalize some of the principal organs of the United Nations in order to overcome certain apparent shortcomings in their functioning. We therefore give our full support to the suggestions contained in the introduction to the annual report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly [A/4132/Add.1]. This document makes some practical suggestions for strengthening the work of the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the International Court of Justice. My delegation, for its part, is prepared to vote in favour of any draft resolution giving effect to the Secretary-General's suggestions.
116.	We regard the recent action taken by the Security Council in the question of Laos as a sound step in the direction we have just indicated. No one can claim that the action of the Security Council is an unlawful intervention. Faced with a request for assistance by a Member State which considered itself a victim of aggression, the Council did the least it could do in such circumstances; it set up a sub-committee to investigate the charge and provide the information necessary on which to base a decision on the matter. I therefore wish to repeat what our representative said in the Security Council, namely, that the resolution adopted took into account both the mutual confidence that should exist among Members of the United Nations and the need to strengthen its authority and prestige.
117.	The Argentine Republic had the honour to be elected a member of the sub-committee, together with Italy, Japan and Tunisia. Our representative — and we are sure, the other members, too — will conduct themselves with complete objectivity and impartiality, and will rely solely on the facts.
118. The measures proposed in the Secretary-General's annual report to the General Assembly [A/4132] would solve some of the most serious difficulties impeding the effective functioning of the Organization, But the reinvigoration of the United Nations as a whole would require a revision of the Charter, and particularly of those aspects which are now out of date or which limit effective action by the principal organs. It has not so far been possible to carry out this revision, for which provision is made in the Charter itself, owing to the fact that the permanent members of the Security Council have been unable to agree on the substance and scope of possible changes. It is to be hoped that, if the talks now in progress between the great Powers produce favourable results, this revision will be undertaken, as it is to a large extent the key to the success or failure of the United Nations as an instrument of international security.
119.	The political tensions and the misunderstandings which divide peoples are closely related to the economic poverty by which many of them are beset. The almost incredible advances in technology and the improvement in human welfare which they imply have so far benefited only a comparatively small number of the inhabitants of this planet. This increased disparity in material conditions is thus connected with the suspicion and animosity which separate social classes and nations. In all fairness, we must acknowledge the magnitude of the co-operation and assistance being afforded by some of the economically more highly endowed countries, in particular the United States of America. Mention should also be made of the action being taken by the United Nations within the framework of its limited resources. In this connexion, we believe that the work carried out by the Special Fund during the year it has been in existence merits the support of all Member States. We consider that, since the Fund is a co-operative undertaking for the benefit of the economically less-developed countries, the scale of contributions should take this factor into account and unduly heavy contributions should not be required of countries which, far from being able to provide help, are in need of it themselves.
120.	In the conviction that economic co-operation is a sound basis for mutual understanding, the countries of America held an economic conference this year in the city of Buenos Aires. This conference stemmed from the valuable project known as "Operation Pan- America", to which we gave our full support and to Which we attach the greatest importance because of the advantages it will bring our countries.
121.	We are sure that the Buenos Aires conference has achieved results superior to those of any regional meeting so far held on the subject in our continent. We also believe that the measures in which it has resulted will help to extend commercial and financial relations among the republics of this continent. Lastly, we are convinced that the establishment of free trade zones, which is now in progress, will make it easier to overcome our material difficulties and will bring us closer to the ideal of a Latin-American common market. We should like to pay a special tribute to the work being carried out by one of the United Nations agencies (ECLA) with a view to the attainment of this objective.
122.	However, financial aid from the more developed countries and even mutual co-operation are not the only prerequisites for the achievement of full prosperity. Such prosperity will only be achieved in so far as the peoples do not my wholly on outside aid but set out to build their prosperity and their greatness by their own efforts. There is not a single example in history of a country which has reached full economic prosperity solely on the basis of outside aid. On the other hand, there are notable examples at the present time of war-ravaged countries which have risen from the ruins, not Only as a result of the assistance they received but also, and above, all, as a result of the energy and determination shown by their citizens.
123.	The recent welcome visit which the Secretary- General made to my country and to other sister republics of Latin America has strengthened the links which bind us to the United Nations. It is true that, since we enjoy the inestimable boon of living at peace, we are not among those who need the support of the United Nations as an instrument of security. But that does not make us indifferent to its fate, because we are convinced that any decline in its moral power means a weakening of one of the principal barriers separating us from barbarism and collective annihilation. We reaffirm our confidence in its activities and pledge our support for any effort to increase its strength and prestige.
124.	It is a commonplace to say that the world is now at the parting of the ways. But this statement is none the less true for being a commonplace. At the present time, the Argentine Republic, which sees grounds for hope as well as for concern, reaffirms its confidence in peace. It also proclaims its solidarity with those who seek to ensure the survival of the basic values of Western civilization on the earth. In this effort we are at one with all the free nations. We feel ourselves to be, above all, an integral part of the community of the peoples of Latin America, which once formed a single whole and which are again aspiring to a closer unity within the Christian world, to which they have belonged since their emergence as civilized peoples.