53.	In opening my remarks today, Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you upon attainment of your present high position and to assure you that Canadians have the utmost confidence in your judgement. Down through the years, representatives of our nation have admired your devotion to the aims and ideals of the United Nations, and we consider ourselves fortunate to have a presiding officer of your experience and achievements. Your record is another example of the splendid contribution which leaders from the Latin American countries have made — and are making — to the success of this world Organization.
54.	In this general debate, I do not intend to discuss all of the important problems in which Canada is interested. Instead, I shall deal only with those on which my Government believes the Canadian position should be made known at once. These problems number seven and are as follows: disarmament, outer space, radiation, aid to less developed nations, world refugees, the United Nations Emergency Force and the situation in Laos.
55.	One problem that is of universal concern is disarmament, a problem the military, political and psychological complexities of which have so far defied solution. Yet we must find a solution. The risk of war arising from crises continues to grow. Technological advances have increased immeasurably the destructive power of new weapons and have shortened to minutes the period of warning of an attack. Nuclear warfare means annihilation. Now, as never before, it is imperative that all States agree on measures to place these new weapons under effective control and progressively to outlaw them, and at the same time to limit and control conventional arms.
56.	I listened with much interest to the disarmament plans outlined last week by Mr. Selwyn Lloyd for the United Kingdom [798th meeting] and by Mr. Khrushchev for the Soviet Union [799th meeting). We shall, of course, want to study these plans carefully and shall reserve detailed comments on them for a later occasion. For the moment, let me say that lam entirely sympathetic with the general objective stated in Mr. Khrushchev's proposal — namely, a world without arms. We would all like to see general and complete disarmament. However, I am looking forward to more detailed proposals designed to this end, particularly with respect to control.
57.	The central question of disarmament turns on the ability of States to find a basis of mutual confidence, and this is realistically reflected in Mr. Lloyd's proposals. That confidence must be such as to enable States to strike a balance between the obvious advantages of liquidating the burden of armaments and the political and military risks of reducing defence against aggression. This balance can be reached, I believe, only through supervised disarmament. There is, therefore, an inseparable relationship between disarming and control, and this must be reflected in any practical plan. The two must be negotiated in parallel and must be put into effect together. Without control, the mutual confidence required to disarm would be lacking, particularly in a time of great political and ideological conflict. Without disarmament, control, of course, would be irrelevant.
58.	I was gratified to hear Mr. Khrushchev say that his Government "advocated ... strict international control over the fulfilment of a disarmament agreement, after Such an agreement has been reached." [A/PV.799, para. 63]. He added, however: "We are in favour of genuine disarmament under control, but we are against control without disarmament" [ibid., para. 64]. He went even further and suggested that the Western Powers had tried to obstruct genuine disarmament by advancing demands for controls more far-reaching than were necessary to ensure implementation and more far-reaching than they themselves were prepared to meet. 1 cannot accept this suggestion. The record does not bear out the charge.
59.	Canada's unique geographical position as a neighbour of both the United States and the Soviet Union gives Canadians a special interest in disarmament. We believe that this goal should be pursued with determination and with patience, using whatever forum is most appropriate, whether in the United Nations or outside. Last year at Geneva, for example, we participated in technical studies concerning the discontinuance of nuclear tests, and in discussions on the problem of surprise attack.
60.	We have consistently asserted, as my Prime Minister did last week, our readiness to open Canadian territory to inspection, particularly in the Artie area, under an equitable and reciprocal system. We continue to hold the opinion that such a system would do much for the restoration of international confidence.
61.	With a view to taking a fresh look at some of the problems of disarmament, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union recently announced [DC/144] the establishment of a ten-Power Disarmament Committee — the creation of which has been noted by the United Nations Disarmament Commission [A/4209], Consistent with our policy of using any forum appropriate for disarmament negotiations, Canada accepted an invitation to participate in this Committee. This body may not be linked with the United Nations to the extent that many countries would prefer, but I wish to emphasize that the Canadian Government has assumed this responsibility in the belief that it will facilitate direct negotiations among the great Powers. The activities of the ten-Power Disarmament Committee are intended not to replace but to supplement the responsibilities of the United Nations in the field of disarmament.
62.	With respect to the link between this Committee and the United Nations, it is our view that it would be in the interest of all concerned not only that the Committee report from time to time to the United Nations but also that the United Nations — probably through its Disarmament Commission — discuss the progress of the Committee's work; encourage its activities; and evolve further ideas in this general field. In this way those Members of the United Nations not participating in the ten-Power Committee would have an effective means of expressing their interest in its objectives. Clearly the medium-sized and smaller Powers must have an opportunity of being heard; for disarmament is of the deepest concern to all mankind. In Canada's work on the Committee we shall at all times keep these two facts very much in mind.
63.	It is my understanding that this Disarmament Committee will begin work early in 1960 and I hope its negotiations will be extended in an orderly manner to a broad range of measures relating to nuclear and other modern weapons and also to conventional weapons and. armed forces. We welcome the fact that the great Powers already are preparing proposals for the Committee, and I may say that Canadian studies are also in progress.
64.	One aspect of disarmament from which we can all draw some encouragement, is the fact that there now exist seventeen agreed articles of a draft treaty- on discontinuance of nuclear tests — which treaty is being negotiated by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. And here may I say the Canadian people are unanimous in their wish to see an end to nuclear testing. It is true that the principal difficulties have yet to be resolved; again they centre on the question of control.
65.	Whatever the solution, it is of the utmost importance for the three nuclear Powers to reach agreement on this central question of the control system. Unless this problem can be solved in respect of the relatively narrow and specific question of nuclear tests, we can hardly expect early progress in either aspects of disarmament where verification and inspection of even greater complexity are likely to be required.
66.	Another aspect of disarmament which should prove susceptible of early negotiation is disarmament in relation to outer space. Two years ago, my Prime Minister urged that the passage of time should not be allowed to bring to the problem of outer space the complications which failure to reach agreement on nuclear weapons has brought to that problem.
67.	Today the pace of scientific and technological progress is staggering to the imagination. An event took place a few days ago which lends further urgency to the need for international consideration of the many problems which may arise as man continues his penetration of outer space. I refer to the tremendous feat of the Soviet Union in hurling a dead weight of considerable magnitude from the earth to the moon. This was a magnificent achievement which is deserving of the greatest praise.
68.	It does, however, emphasize the urgent necessity of having the international community establish adequate regulation where none exists. In particular, early consideration must be given to establishing rules determining the limits of national sovereignty in space,
69.	The Ad Hoc Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space which was set up at the thirteenth session [resolution 1348 (XUI)] has made a useful start in considering the scientific, technical and legal aspects of co-operation within the United Nations. Canada served on that Committee and provided the Chairman for the Technical Committee, whose work forms the basis for a large part of the report we shall be considering [A/4141], Our great regret is that one of the two nations which have the greatest accomplishments in space technology did not participate in the preparation of this initial report. I do not think the report contains anything to which the Soviet Union should take exception.
70.	We trust that further arrangements to pursue these matters will have the co-operation of the Soviet Union. Their continued non-participation cannot fail to limit the value of any proposals that may be considered. Canada will, of course, continue to cooperate to the fullest extent in any international consideration of these problems, whether this be at the inter-governmental level as in the United Nations, or in the highly important area of international cooperation among scientists.
71.	I should like now to touch upon another question of vital importance: the hazards resulting from the addition of man-made radiation to that which already occurs in nature. The United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, in its report this year to the General Assembly [A/4119], has outlined what appears to my delegation to be an admirable and useful programme for the next few years.
72.	All mankind is concerned that knowledge of the biological and other effects of radiation, and of the present extent of the hazard, should be enlarged. We must also realize that even if the nations agree to stop testing nuclear weapons, the problem of radiation will not vanish. The large .and growing use of radiation in medicine; the atomic era in industry with the possibility of accidents — for example in power stations soon to become a familiar sight in many lands; the risks connected with the disposal of radioactive waste; all these and similar perils which are unforeseeable now — will be with us henceforth. They will present complex problems demanding constant observation, study and precaution.
73.	There is an urgent need to fill the substantial gaps which continue to exist in our knowledge of the phenomenon of radiation. In a matter which is of such concern to human life and future generations, all Member States have an equal interest in ensuring that research into the biological effects of radiation be based on the fullest and most reliable information. For this purpose, scientists must have at their disposal data on radiation from fall-out and other sources which would be as clearly as possible world-wide in its scope and collected by standardized methods.
74.	All Member States can make a vital contribution towards this objective by co-operating to the fullest possible extent in the collection of data and in remitting it to a central agency for collation. The collated data would then be available to Governments, and to scientific and medical research institutions, for investigation of the biological effects and industrial hazards of radiation. The pooling, in turn, of the results of such research through the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation can make a further valuable contribution to the world’s collective knowledge of this common problem.
75.	We believe that mankind would derive relief from anxiety if the nations of the world were to acknowledge an obligation to do what they can to ensure that the world-wide physical measurement of the intensity and distribution of radiation is made as accurate and complete as possible.
76. At this session the Canadian delegation intends to submit a proposal which we sincerely hope will encourage the world-wide collection of more accurate data on radiation and will provide for its central collation.
77.	I turn now to the question of aid to less developed nations. First I should like to re-emphasize my country’s concern for economic development in less developed areas. Much good work has already been accomplished in this field both inside and outside the United Nations. A great deal more remains to be done for which we believe vigorous action is required to accelerate the social and economic progress of people throughout the world.
78.	The Canadian Government has always strongly supported multilateral United Nations economic assistance programmes. We will be providing our share of the increased resources of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. In the past year we gave $2 million to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and another $2 million to the newly established Special Fund. Canadian representatives participated actively in the establishment of this new organization. My Government’s contribution in the first year of the Fund's operation indicated our confidence that it will become an important source of assistance in fields essential to the integrated development of less developed countries.
79.	Members of the United Nations will be aware that, apart from the multilateral programmes under the aegis of the United Nations, other substantial and useful aid programmes exist. The Colombo Plan is one of them with which my country has been very happily associated. We have found that these plans, in which the donor and receiver countries work in close co-operation, have had good results. The impetus and the prime effort must come from the recipient; only then can a healthy relationship exist between donor and recipient.
80.	My delegation will at this session, as in the past, work closely with delegations, both from recipient and from donor countries, to continue building up the sound patterns of economic co-operation which have been laid down in the United Nations in the past years.
81.	I now come to a heart-rending subject. One of the world's most pressing social problems is that of refugees. This is World Refugee Year during which most Member States are pledged to make a determined assault on the problem.
82.	Delegates know the active interest Canada has always taken in the plight of the millions of unfortunate people uprooted by the Second World War and by political unrest during the post-war years. Many scores of thousands of these people have made a new start in Canada and have enriched our national life.
83.	In addition, Canada has for many years contributed to programmes to alleviate the distressing conditions in which refugees, through no fault of their own, are compelled to exist in camps throughout the world. We have made substantial financial contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to the programmes of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and to the Far Eastern operation of the Intergovernmental Committee for European Migration. Canada can be counted on again this year to assume its share in maintaining these international programmes.
84.	The essence of the World Refugee Year is, however, that Governments should make an extra effort. In considering what special contribution would be most appropriate and effective, my Government noted that the camp clearance project of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees had been assigned a top priority. If increased efforts could be made, it appeared possible to close the European camps and thereby terminate one entire United Nations refugee programme.
85.	We are all aware that the remaining population of these European camps contains a high proportion of people who are difficult to relocate elsewhere because they fail to meet the medical regulations of countries which might provide a new home. A great many of these so-called "hard-core" cases are Suffering from tuberculosis; In many instances whole families have had to face the prospect of remaining indefinitely in the camps because one member had contracted that disease.
86.	I am pleased to announce, therefore, that as its special contribution to the World Refugee Year the Canadian Government will waive normal immigration requirements and admit to Canada a substantial number of tubercular refugees and their families. This group will be brought to Canada and treated in sanatoria at Canadian expense. Furthermore, a family unable to support itself while a member is under treatment will receive maintenance payments. It is my hope that the first refugees selected will reach Canada by the end of this calendar year.
87.	In this undertaking the Canadian Government will have the co-operation of provincial governments and the active support of a private organization known as the Canadian Committee for World Refugee Year.
88.	I am aware that a number of other Members of the United Nations have outlined imaginative plans to receive handicapped refugees. Our collective efforts should have the effect of easing or bringing to an end the disproportionate burden which some European, countries have carried since 1945, fourteen years ago. Above all, Canada welcomes the occasion offered by World Refugee Year to give a group of human beings whose plight is particularly tragic an opportunity to rebuild their lives in dignity and in happiness.
89.	One other item on the agenda which is of special interest to Canada concerns the United Nations Emergency Force. This Force has for another year admirably carried out the tasks set for it by the General Assembly. Canadians are proud of the part which their armed forces are playing, with those of other contributing States, in attaining this satisfactory result.
90.	In view of the relative quiet which now prevails in the area where it is stationed, some Member States might be of the opinion that the time has arrived to curtail the Force’s operations. I think we should bear in mind, however, that the, reduction of frontier incidents between the United Arab Republic and Israel is due in large measure to the presence of the Force. It would therefore be unfortunate if the contribution of UNEF to more stable conditions in the area should now be jeopardized by a premature limitation of its operations.
91.	All Member States have an equal interest in ensuring the continuing effectiveness of the Force. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to consolidate its financial position. We hope these efforts will receive a degree of co-operation commensurate with the political significance of the UNEF operation and of the collective responsibility of all Members to maintain international peace and security.
92.	Finally, I turn to conditions in the Far East. May I say that in our view a notable effort was made at the Geneva Conference in 1954 to establish equilibrium in Indochina. It was an effort at peace-making fully compatible with the United Nations Charter. The principles underlying the Geneva agreements, and in particular the principle of non-alignment, should be respected in order to lessen the tension existing in that troubled area,
93.	The United Nations for its part has an important role to perform, not — as has been charged — in upsetting the regime established at Geneva, but in supplementing it with arrangements essential for the long-term stability of the area.
94.	It seems to us that the United Nations must look ahead at this long-term future. True, we have in Laos at present a sub-committee, set up by the Security Council, and we must await its report upon the facts of the situation there. However, the very presence of this United Nations body seems already to be having a pacifying effect.
95.	There exist in that part of the world a number of newly-established States which are finding their feet as nations in conditions of international tension. These new nations have many needs, but by far the greatest are peace and other conditions for material development. We believe that the United Nations has a proper, legitimate interest and concern in this area in which a number of its Members are located, including Laos.
96.	Admittedly the efforts of the United Nations to help to preserve peace may be seriously hampered by the attitude towards the Organization of certain non-member States directly interested in the problem; but we must hope that such States will as time goes on come to recognize the useful contribution the United Nations can make.
97.	For all these reasons, should the United Nations not now find a way to express its continuing interest in Laos? Such an approach, if it were welcome to Laos, could make a most valuable contribution to stability. We, for our part, have come to the view that some appropriate and continuing expression of United Nations concern is desirable, not only in the interest of the people of Laos but also in the general interest of world peace and security.
98.	In conclusion, I believe that this session of the Assembly can go far to bring renewed hope to the people of all lands; they desire, above all else, permanent world peace. We meet in a period when there is some diminution in world tension, largely due to the friendly' exchange of visits this year between the leaders of great Powers. These visits could be the starting point on a new road which would lead away from all the friction and distrust which have developed since the Second World War. Whether or not they do lead in that direction may very well depend in large measure upon the words and actions of the delegates to the present Assembly — and I am sure that we will not fail to meet this great challenge.