19.	Mr. TURBAY AYALA (Colombia) (translated from Spanish): Both as the representative of a democratic Government and as spokesman for a Latin American country, I am proud that a statesman from our continent should preside over this year’s session of the General Assembly. I wish to congratulate both Peru and Mr. Belaúnde on the honour which has been bestowed on them.
20.	The debate which annually takes place in the General Assembly is a living and eloquent example of the juridical equality of nations. Regardless of the intrinsic importance of the countries taking part in it, this debate enables all nations to place their views on the scales of world destiny. My country thus takes part in the consideration of the international situation solely by reason of its simple and worthy credential as a State Member of the United Nations.
21.	Conscious of its technological and military limitations, Colombia does not intend to overstep the bounds of discretion by presenting plans or programmes that would be more appropriately set forth by those Powers whose arsenals contain the destructive weapons placed in their hands by the scientists.
22.	The views which I voice here are designed solely to express the desire for understanding of a country which believes that it can best contribute to the cause of peace by conforming, in its conduct, to the principles of the Charter.
23.	In our opinion, it is particularly important that, when hopes for peace and freedom are voiced, what is said should be supported by the example set by the countries on whose behalf they are expressed. The internal conduct of nations cannot be separated from their external attitudes. It is unreasonable, to say the least, to advocate the international application of standards which are not enforced at the national level.
24.	Fortunately, my country has no problem of conscience, and can speak in this Assembly with full moral authority on the subject of respect for the basic principles of this world Organization. In Colombia, the Government is genuinely popular and democratic in origin, and freedom of expression is curtailed by no abusive limitations. Not only do the political parties exist peacefully together, but there is wholesome and harmonious co-operation between them, which has helped the Republic to reconstruct its traditional institutions and to create an atmosphere conducive to peace.
25.	Colombia, however, has a problem which is common to twenty countries in this hemisphere and to at least 1,500 million human beings living in various parts of the globe. It is a serious situation, which should be faced with courage and determination. Its treatment, unfortunately, is not dependent solely on action by the countries which suffer from it. I refer to economic under-development, the disruptive potentialities of which none would presume to deny,
26.	Other measures adopted to ensure peace will have little effect if the peoples’ distress, and social difficulties, cannot be quickly relieved. Colombia has no hesitation in stigmatizing economic under-development as the most formidable enemy of political stability and international peace, and in regarding want as the most deplorable and repulsive dictatorship ever experienced by man. The explosive power of want is comparable to that of nuclear weapons themselves, and therefore calls for immediate and effective solution. No less urgent and important than a policy of disarmament is action to avert the series of disasters which economic underdevelopment brings in its train,
27.	The United Nations cannot, of course, at any time neglect political problems or the situations arising from the overwhelming pressure daily exerted by developments in the fields of nuclear energy and the knowledge of cosmic space; but no less certainly must it pay special attention to the study of formulae for economic co-operation and technical assistance that will enable the backward peoples to raise their levels of living.
28.	Colombia, which has drawn its spiritual sustenance from the springs of Christianity and resolutely adheres to all the values which go to make up Western civilization, appreciates that within the system of private enterprise and political freedom it is feasible to work towards objectives of justice which will avoid inequalities and the possibility that poverty may create social problems leading to unimagined consequences. We do not propose any change in the present system, but we suggest, rather, some rearrangement which will enable it to continue along the civilizing, path of its destiny. It has been stated — and these are no empty words — that the concept of peace is inseparable from the concepts of freedom, Security and well-being,
29.	The greatest contribution which can be made to the ultimate victory of democracy is -undoubtedly that which can be made to economic development, so that the peoples may be brought to enjoy the benefits of civilization and maintain a level of living commensurate with the supreme dignity of the human being. The cause of peace will always be better served by those peoples whose paths to the future are not obstructed by insurmountable economic obstacles.
30.	At the risk of being repetitive, I would like to stress Colombia’s view that the battle against poverty is an urgent necessity for the purpose of strengthening social peace. It may be worth stating that the effort to change conditions in the economically backward and socially dissatisfied countries calls for less financial investment and technical endeavour than has been put into service in order to place within the peoples’ reach, as a cursed legacy of science, the terrible weapons of destruction controlled by certain nations at the present time.
31.	We are aware that the United Nations is assigning due importance to economic problems and has already taken certain steps along a road which must be covered in its entirety. It might be possible to consider some resolution which would commit countries to provide for economic development sums at least equivalent to those that they are investing in the mad race for armaments.
32.	It is clear that the American countries as a whole are making heroic and self-sacrificing efforts to equip themselves for the battle against economic stagnation. Certainly the establishment of the Inter-American Bank, which will begin operations next year, is a step in the right direction from the standpoint of our prosperity. Naturally, we do not believe that its capital will suffice to effect a complete transformation of living conditions in Latin America, although it is our firm conviction that this institution, gradually receiving greater contributions, is destined to produce good results. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development must be regarded as one of the many possible sources of help for Latin American countries.
33.	We need technical assistance and economic cooperation in order to achieve social tranquillity and to make a better contribution to international peace. Therefore, the concept should be clearly established that nations in the position of mine seek and accept, not charity, but assistance. Latin America is able to return, in ample measure, the help which is being given to it at the present time. We are convinced that the countries of this continent, if timely aid is provided, will be able to fulfil their historic mission and render unflagging service to the basic principles of freedom and peace.
34.	Brazil, which is fully aware of the grave problem constituted by the contrast between the rapid growth in population and the slow economic progress characteristic of most countries in this hemisphere, has reappraised our needs and proposed a programme of achievement known as “Operation Pan-America”.
35.	We cannot be indifferent to the fate of this salutary initiative, which we are all interested in promoting and seeing fully implemented. On behalf of Colombia I proclaim our support of the idea which the President of Brazil, Mr. Kubitschek, has expounded so ably and in a spirit of service which the rest of vs deeply appreciate.
36.	It might not be out of place to stress the importance which the peoples of America attach to spiritual values and to respect for the dignity of the human person. In this connexion we would mention, as a step forward, the conclusions reached at the meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs at Santiago, Chile, where we affirmed that the support of peace in America required an active combination of democracy, respect for the principle of non-intervention, the defence and application of human rights, and the economic security of the individual. As can be seen, we, the nations of the Western Hemisphere, have used our regional organization to surround our peoples with an atmosphere of genuine spiritual independence and unbreakable political security.
37.	Obviously, my country fully supports the Powers responsible for maintaining and defending Western civilization. We have no difficulty in committing ourselves on this matter and stating that such a stand is in line with long-established doctrinal convictions, which fortunately enjoy abundant support from public opinion in our nation.
38.	Colombia has always believed, and has so stated on other occasions, that if the Latin American countries decided to co-ordinate their efforts they would undoubtedly be able to play a historic role of very extensive proportions in the United Nations. The numerical importance of these countries enables them to play a more significant part in major international decisions. We are the greatest combination of nations linked together by the ties of a common language, united by the same religious beliefs, and defending the same spiritual and political values.
39.	The opportunities which language, geography and history have extended to the Latin American nations are exceptional factors making for the achievement of political unity on the international plane. But we have not made adequate use of these advantages and have preferred to act on the basis of an individualistic outlook, instead of being guided by the principle of continental understanding.
40.	It is far from Colombia's intentions to propose to the other American countries an exclusive type of alliance or a plan in anyway limiting their full freedom of action. Its proposal is simply that the countries of this hemisphere be asked to tighten their international links, to improve their sources of information, to bear their own importance well in mind, and to exercise a more active and direct influence in the consideration of world problems. It depends entirely on us whether we act as a force capable of decision or proceed on an individualistic basis, supporting the plans of others without making any decisions of our own. In the last analysis, it is a question of which of these two verbs —  “support” or "decide" — the Latin American countries prefer to conjugate.
41.	Nobody can deny that we are peace-loving peoples and that we therefore seek to settle disputes by reasoning, persuasion and other peaceful means. Perhaps this policy arises from our conviction that this is the Held in which we can make our maximum contribution towards harmony among the nations.
42.	Colombia has growing confidence in the effectiveness of direct contacts between statesmen, and does not conceal its satisfaction at those now being established between the representatives of the two greatest world Powers of all time. Undoubtedly, the exchange of visits between Mr. Khrushchev, Mr. Eisenhower and Mr. Nixon represents a happy step in the path towards cordial relations, in that it does something more than merely provide evidence of the antagonism between the two countries, which are quite rightly regarded as giants in the fields of science, economy, peace and war.
43.	It would be naive to assume that these actions alone can bring order to this turmoil-ridden world of ours; but it would equally be foolish to deny that such contacts relieve the international atmosphere and create a better psychological climate for understanding.
44., Many benefits can flow from a better mutual understanding between two worlds, which have remained closed to each other by the will of one of them, and which are only now, at the highest level, seeking once more the "rapprochement" which was interrupted lifter both had battled memorably against the combined forces of Nazism and Fascism.
45.	May these conversations be as successful as those which took place between Mr. Roosevelt and Mr. Stalin, and may they serve to shield the world from the unspeakable dangers of the atomic war which the monumental loser of the Second World War had himself planned!
46.	It is to be hoped that the talks which have begun may be extended to include the leaders of the other nuclear Powers, since the latter bear inescapable responsibilities and must make a decisive contribution to the maintenance of harmony among the peoples.
47.	The unarmed countries, like the one I represent, have placed great hope in the new and promising phase of relationships between East and West. Our concern is understandable because the small nations, like the big ones, nearly always experience all the horrors of any war.
48.	It may be well for me to record Colombia's conviction that the world must in no circumstances consent to a third world war. If nuclear weapons were employed, the world would revert to the first night of Genesis, and the few survivors — if indeed there were any at all —  would merely serve as witnesses of the apocalyptic tragedy which it is incumbent upon every one of us to prevent.
49.	Colombia is convinced that, on the American continent and throughout the rest of the world, the principle of non-intervention should be respected by all countries. We have seen that intervention does not always take the clear-cut form of a frontal attack, but often, as the Argentine Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Taboada, has observed, proceeds by diplomatic infiltration. Good relations between nations must undoubtedly have, as a prime feature, genuine respect for the peoples' domestic affairs; in regard to these, diplomatic or consular agents may be spectators, but not actors. When the bounds of discretion are overstepped and the systems devised by countries to strengthen their friendship are used for other purposes, diplomatic relations are thwarted in their very nature and become superfluous in cases where such offences are detected.
50.	Colombia has maintained a policy of friendship with all countries, and of consistent, respect for all Governments. Accordingly, and to the extent which it deemed necessary, it has extended its diplomatic and commercial relations. To protect our economy, we have had to reach understandings with the countries which also produce our main export commodity; and this fact makes us realize that we cannot take a narrow view of any problem, but that all questions must be examined in the light of their international implications.
51.	My country knows that discriminatory practices are not conducive to the expansion of foreign trade, and has therefore stated that it is prepared to sell its products to any who wish to buy them, on a basis of equality for all and favouritism for none.
52.	Colombia has also expounded and given effect to a policy of international co-operation for the purpose of protecting the prices of its basic products, and it is therefore prepared to examine, with the representatives of the countries concerned, effective plans for checking over-production in these commodities and for regulating the world market.
53.	We have always believed that the influence of the United Nations should be felt throughout the widest possible area of opinion, and we therefore trust that before long conditions will be created such as will enable the maximum number of States to join the world Organization. Matters are gradually moving in this direction, and everything suggests that this favourable trend will continue until the day comes when all countries are in a position to serve the cause of peace within the framework of the United Nations.
54.	We have faith in a prosperous future for humanity; and, within our limited capacity, we wish to serve the interests of peace, so that the coming generations will have no cause to disown the leaders of the present generation and will have opportunities of enriching the world with the invaluable gifts of their intelligence and their knowledge. Fortunately, the threat of war is receding, and everything seems to indicate that reason will triumph in its present contest with brute force.
55.	These are the views of a country which respects law, has faith in spiritual values, trusts in democracy, and is equally attached to freedom and to peace.