13.	Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you on your unanimous election to your high office. This Assembly could not initiate its very important task under a more able and wise leadership than yours.
14.	Irrespective of the many unsolved problems and dangerous tensions which continue to characterize the international situation, it appears to me justified to stress that present developments seem to hold out certain prospects of a relaxation of tension and a consolidation of peace. The crucial question is whether we shall be able to exploit these possibilities; which, in certain respects, seem to be better than they have been for several years.
15.	In bringing about the improved international climate, the exchange, on high and highest level, of personal visits between the representatives of the great Powers of East and West has undoubtedly been a major factor both as a cause and effect. In a few hours there will, in this country, be renewed talks between the chief executives of the world’s two most important Powers, and these talks are planned to be resumed in the Soviet Union in the near future. These exchanges of personal visits may mean the opening of a new era in international relations. We must realize, however, that the tasks confronting us are great and difficult. There are still many hurdles on the road before we reach the peaceful co-operation envisaged in the Charter.
16.	The first, and perhaps the most complicated problem for international negotiation, is the problem of disarmament. If we are entering a period of reduced political tensions, this would mean an improved climate for progress in the debate on disarmament. Complete and comprehensive disarmament is of vital interest to all nations, great or small, to avert the dangers of all destructive war and to alleviate the arms burden from the shoulders of mankind, thus enabling immense productive forces to be dedicated to raising the living standard of millions of human beings.
17.	We have listened with great interest to two apparently rather different proposals on general international disarmament. The first proposal was advanced [798th meeting] by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom, Mr. Selwyn Lloyd, and the other [799th meeting] by Mr. Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR. Without going into a thorough analysis here, I should like to point out that, although the two proposals may seem to differ considerably, they have in common that they both aim at total disarmament as the ultimate goal. The United Kingdom plan clearly stresses certain essential points. Importance is attached to progress by stages, to a balanced disarmament — so that one group of Powers should not have a greater possibility of retaining its armed strength than other groups — and, finally, that disarmament should be subject to effective international control at each stage. I think that by stressing these points, Mr. Lloyd’s plan appears more realistic than Mr. Khrushchev’s. I feel, I ought to add, however, that as I see it, there was nothing in Mr. Khrushchev’s plan which would rule out a similar realistic approach. I take it that, during the continued discussions of the disarmament issue, the two proposals will be given a detailed analysis.
18.	We must admit that, in the years since 1945, detailed and lengthy discussions by experts on the question of disarmament have led to only modest results. I agree with the representative of Norway who stated [807th meeting] that a pragmatic approach has certain advantages; and the diplomatic and technical discussions on various aspects of the disarmament problem, which are already in progress, should, of course, continue. It could very well be, however, that we have now reached a point where decisions concerning the main principles of disarmament and the control thereof should be made at the highest level.
19.	It is the opinion of the Danish Government that special attention should be devoted to the problem of controlled suspension of nuclear tests. We feel that the suspension of such tests would tend to reduce tensions and at the same time, by preventing an aggravation of the dangers inherent in radioactive radiation, would have great influence on the feeling of security of the peoples. It is, therefore, with satisfaction that we have noted the fact that no tests have been conducted in almost one whole year.
20.	Besides the question of disarmament, there are several other international problems of paramount importance. The efforts to reach a solution of all these problems would, I am sure, benefit by high level personal talks. It is our belief that very careful consideration should be given to the possibility of creating conditions for holding a summit conference to deal with these problems. This seems to us to be a natural sequel to the various talks which are now taking place or which have recently taken place at top level.
21.	We take it that the Berlin question would become a major item on the agenda of a summit conference. If our impressions are correct, the Foreign Ministers, during this summer’s lengthy discussions at Geneva, have got as far with these problems as possible. Certain important problems are still unsolved, and these might find their solution at a summit meeting.
22.	I would now like to make a few observations on the situation in the Middle East. Having in mind the statements already made by several distinguished representatives, I wish to state that the Danish Government supports the principle of freedom of passage of ships and cargo of all nations through the Suez Canal. It is well known, I think, that a Danish vessel, the Inge Toft under foreign charter, has been detained at the entrance to the Canal since May 1959. We sincerely hope that the continued efforts of the United Nations will contribute to a satisfactory solution in the near future.
23.	In view of the importance of political stability hi the Middle East, I should like to suggest that the work which has so far been carried out by UNRWA is not only a humanitarian one, but has at the same time political significance. We therefore consider it essential that this agency should be enabled to continue its efforts for a certain period when its present terms of reference expire in 1960, This period should be used to geek a final solution to the refugee problem in the Middle East.
24.	Concurrently with the efforts of the Governments directly concerned, the efforts of the United Nations and of the Secretary-General have contributed to promote the development of greater stability in the Middle East. In this connexion mention should also be made of the importance of the presence of the United Nations Emergency Force in part of the area. In his report on UNEF [A/3899] the Secretary-General states that the maintenance of peaceful conditions along the entire line between Egypt and Israel is attributable in no small measure to the presence of this peace force. Against this background, I note with satisfaction that, through its participation with a contingent in UNEF, Denmark — together with other countries — has been able to contribute within the framework of the United Nations to the fulfillment of one of the most significant objectives of the United Nations Charter.
25.	It is the intention of the Danish Government to continue to support these efforts. We trust that the problems concerning the sharing of the financial burden will be solved in the forthcoming discussions during this session. In our opinion, UNEF has met with such considerable success as to warrant giving serious consideration to at least some steps towards the establishment of a permanent United Nations force. The question of creating such a force is also connected with the problem of total disarmament. We realize that the setting up of a permanent United Nations force will confront us with many questions, also of a financial nature. But I think that certain preliminary steps could be taken along the lines suggested by the representative of the United Kingdom, [798th meeting] such as the earmarking by Member States of personnel and the setting up of a small planning section in the United Nations Secretariat.
26.	The political problems, which I mentioned here, make it natural that we all wish that the United Nations should become as strong an organization as possible. In the Danish view, one of the means of strengthening the United Nations is to make the Organization as universal as possible. It hardly seems in the interests of the United Nations that the most populous country in the world, the Peopled Republic of China, is not represented through the Government which has exercised full authority in China for so many years. The Danish Government maintains the view that the People's Republic of China should be represented in the United Nations, and we have given our vote in conformity with that view.
27.	It is in the common interest that the United Nations should be respected in all Member countries. It is therefore with concern that the Danish Government has noted that the Hungarian Government has not even been willing to receive the Special Representative of the United Nations.
28.	I shall now make some remarks about the tasks confronting the United Nations in the economic field. Denmark supports all efforts which may lead to expanded production and a higher standard of living in the world. We give our support to efforts aiming at expanded international trade on a regional as well as a universal basis. The European market plans are of great significance to Denmark, but at the same time we are aiming at increased commercial relations with the countries that are not participating in these plans. We feel that an increase of East-West trade is important also because of its political significance. The United Nations has a great mission to fulfil in regard to economic assistance to the so-called less developed areas.
29.	One of the guiding principles of the United Nations could, I think, be characterized as the principle of solidarity amongst the Member States. The Expanded Technical Assistance Programme is in conformity with this principle and has already led to considerable progress, but vital tasks are still awaiting a solution. The Danish Government will continue to give its wholehearted support to this vital work.
30.	The Technical Assistance Programme is being appreciably supplemented through the Special Fund which was established by a resolution [1240 (XHI)] adopted by the General Assembly! during its thirteenth session. In the course of an impressively short time the Fund has gone well ahead on its tasks. This start holds out good prospects for the future. There is reason to congratulate the organs of the Fund and its Managing Director, Mr. Paul G. Huffman, on their excellent achievements.
31.	The Special Fund is paving the way for capital investment in the less developed areas and must therefore be supplemented by still another body to handle the investments. During its thirteenth session the General Assembly adopted a resolution [resolution 1317 (XIII)] concerning a United Nations capital development fund, and later the suggestion was made to establish an international development association, a suggestion which is going to be discussed at the forthcoming annual meeting of the Board of Governors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The Danish Government is prepared to participate in careful and benevolent consideration of plans of this nature. As to membership, we would welcome efforts to probe existing possibilities of creating as broad a basis as possible.
32.	May I refer next to an international problem which is not on our agenda this year but which is of particular interest to my Government. I have in mind the question of territorial waters and fishery limits which was such an important issue at the last General Assembly, and which will be submitted to the second United Nations conference on the law of the sea, to meet in Geneva in the spring of 1960. I refer to it here because I wish to express my sincere hope that the conference next year may reach an agreed solution of these difficult problems, and I would urge all States represented here to do their utmost in this respect, bearing in mind that agreed solutions must always be compromises and involve a certain amount of give and take. I also wish to appeal to many of the greater nations represented here to remember the special consideration which for many reasons should be given to nations or territories situated under such conditions that a population could simply not maintain a reasonable standard of living without the resources of the sea.
33.	Although there are certain rays of light in the international situation, it is still premature to take an optimistic view. In many fields, strong forces have been put in motion in our world, forces which we have hardly learned to control and whose final results hardly anybody could imagine. I am thinking of the frightening development of nuclear weapons. We have not yet reached the technical limit for the impact of nuclear explosions. I also have in mind the almost inconceivable progress in regard to the conquest by man of outer space. Achievements in this field are impressive. But we could hardly witness the advance of science and technology in these spheres without a feeling that these very brilliant results might be misused for military purposes. They could thus, in the same way as the knowledge of nuclear fission, become a threat to mankind. There is a growing need for political decisions which could control and remove this threat. The huge scientific and technical forces which are now diverted to military purposes should be directed exclusively to efforts serving the cause of peace and the well-being of people everywhere.
34.	But strong forces are in motion also in the political field. I have in mind not only the differences between the Western world and the Communist world, differences which personal contacts between statesmen might help to reduce. I am thinking also of the strong national movements which we are seeing developing all over the globe and perhaps particularly in Africa and Asia. I wish to say that in Denmark we respect these movements as long as their goals are promoted by peaceful means and by methods which do not violate human rights. It is our wish that these movements, in natural co-operation with the nations, and especially with those who have old relations with the regions of the world where these movements are taking place, may create better conditions of living and greater freedom for their peoples.
35.	It is unfortunate that racial strife and prejudice are not everywhere a thing of the past. In Denmark we feel that in several parts of the world conditions leave much to be desired in this respect. We think that nowhere should one race be allowed to discriminate against another race.
36.	In conclusion, I should like to express the confidence of the Danish Government in the Secretary-General, who has so admirably shown himself ready, whenever circumstances so required, to devote his personal insight and efforts to the cause of peace. In our opinion, the Secretary-General’s quiet diplomacy has had considerable success.