82.	Most speakers in this general debate have referred to the recent visit to the United States of the Head of the Soviet Government. The meetings between Mr. Eisenhower and Mr. Khrushchev have had a profound impact on the international atmosphere, and consequently on this Assembly, and my delegation wishes to take this opportunity of joining in the expressions of satisfaction and hope voiced here by so many representatives before me. These meetings may be seen as the most important single step so far towards the implementation of the resolutions on "Peaceful and neighbourly relations among States" (1,236 (XII) and 1301 (XIII)) adopted unanimously by the Assembly at its twelfth and thirteenth sessions. The essence of these resolutions, as indeed of the Charter itself, was echoed in the communique issued by the two statesmen at the close of their talks on 27 September 1959 in which they renounced the use of force and pledged themselves to settling all outstanding international issues by peaceful means through negotiation.
83.	In a statement on these subjects before the First Committee at the twelfth session of the Assembly, I had occasion to point out that "we in Finland are loath to see the world we live in consisting of separated groups of countries" and I ventured to suggest that "Terms such as East and West ought to belong solely to the realm of geography". In saying this, I was not merely voicing pious sentiments; I was stating a Finnish national interest. To explain what I mean, perhaps I may restate briefly some of the main principles underlying Finland's foreign policy, which, in fact, are not without relevance to the main topics of today.
84.	For the past fifteen years, Finland has sought to safeguard its security, not by relying on military means, but by gaining the confidence of the great Power which is its neighbour, by maintaining friendly relations with all countries, by disassociating itself from the conflicts of interest and the tensions between others, by adhering faithfully to all obligations undertaken. Our policy of neutrality, as I believe we have been able to demonstrate by our words and actions in the United Nations, is designed to remove Finland unequivocally from the realm of political speculation, and the more hopeful international atmosphere cannot but strengthen our belief in its success.
85.	I should like in this connexion to repeat the following words from a speech by the President of Finland, Mr. Urho Kekkonen: "We realize the decisive importance of mutual trust in international life. It seems to us that we have succeeded in building our relations with our closest neighbours on the firm basis of confidence. It may be said that honesty in our international dealings is a national necessity, for it is of vital importance for Finland that others have confidence in us. We want to demonstrate to all nations, near and far, that our word can be trusted, that we act honourably, without guile or malice. We ask for confidence in such a foreign policy, which is in keeping with the Finnish national character, and we are happy to note that our sincere efforts meet with sympathetic response."
86.	Future development of friendly and peaceful relations between nations will to a great extent be measured by progress in the field of disarmament. The Finnish Government has, on several occasions, both here and elsewhere, declared its willingness to support and, if possible, to facilitate all efforts designed to bring about genuine disarmament under adequate control, and my delegation wishes to renew this pledge at this session. This applies both to the great aim of general disarmament and to such partial or interim measures as may be regarded as steps towards the ultimate goal. Any measure which, by advancing disarmament, will serve the cause of mutual confidence and of security for all nations will receive the support of my delegation, and the more far-reaching such measures prove to be the more we shall welcome them. My delegation also welcomes the decision to resume disarmament negotiations within the ten-Power disarmament committee as a practical way of dealing with the problem at this stage. This does not, of course, absolve the United Nations of its responsibility in this matter.
87.	It seems to me that our main task at the United Nations is to endeavour to create the most favourable atmosphere for the forthcoming negotiations, and this, we believe, can best be achieved by concentrating in our activities on constructive proposals that could command the widest possible support among the nations most closely concerned. Such a course of action might most likely prove to be an efficient contribution to the furthering of our common aim.
88.	The question of disarmament is frequently being linked to that of aiding the less developed countries, in the sense that savings in military expenditures could release funds for economic development. There is, however, also another link between the two problems, less tangible but at least equally important. This lies in the fact that substantial and wide economic growth can be achieved only when international tension and suspicion are lessened and the feeling of insecurity and the fear of war are removed.
89.	My delegation, at a recent meeting of the Economic and Social Council, stressed the fact that constructive work in all the fields where it is so badly needed can foe achieved only if the nations involved — and we are all involved — consider that they can have confidence, deep and unshattered confidence, in the stability of peace and in the permanence and sincerity of friendly relations among nations. Only then can we build on the necessary assumptions of international co-operation, of steadily increasing world trade, and of a reasonable and efficient international division of labour.
90.	Very little indeed could be achieved, especially in the economic field, for the benefit of the less developed parts of the world without a deep conviction that we may have faith in the future and that, consequently, it is really worth-while to build a new and better world for ourselves, for our fellowmen, and for coming generations. 
91.	The creation of confidence between nations is necessarily a slow and gradual process. We know this from our own national experience. Mankind has lived. for so long in a world of strain and crisis that we are understandably cautious in our hopes for an improvement;. None of us, I am sure, underestimates the difficulties of the perhaps long process of negotiations that lies ahead of us. In this process, the United Nations, we believe, has a vitally important part to play. My delegation has consistently advocated the view that our task here is to narrow differences, to seek solutions that aim at conciliation and compromise, rather than sharpen existing conflicts or create new ones. We, on our part, will continue to do our best to live up to this view. The prestige and authority of the United Nations, in our opinion, cannot but suffer if we devote our time to proposals and resolutions that turn out to be hollow words when tested against the realities of the world we live in. This should not be the place to vent our frustrations.
92.	My delegation does not share the view that recent trends need mean a diminution of the role of this Organization. In this context, I wish to recall the significant words of the Secretary-General in his excellent introduction to his annual report. He pointed out that: "The various diplomatic and political activities in the course of the past year are in full harmony with the intentions expressed in the Charter. They may even be said to reflect obligations which Member nations have assumed in the Charter. Also, irrespective of this formal aspect of the matter, those who support the work of the Organization must welcome all such serious efforts to further the purposes for which it was set up, whatever the specific form such efforts may take." [A/4132/ Add.1, p, X.] In another connexion, the Secretary-General described the United Nations as "an added instrument providing, within the limits of its competence, a further or ultimate support for the maintenance of peace and security." [Ibid]
93.	We have at this stage a great responsibility for using this instrument to its full advantage.