67.	Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on your election to the office of the presidency of the present session of the General Assembly. Your knowledge and experience of the United Nations, and the fact that you are identified with the noble causes which are deliberated here, all amply warrant your occupying this high office.
68.	I should also like to pay a tribute to the wise statesmanship and outstanding ability of the Secretary-General, whose wholehearted devotion to the cause of constructive international co-operation is a great asset to this Organization.
69.	This is the opening of our annual general debate on international affairs, and an opportunity for me to present the views of my Government on some of the most important world problems,
70.	At the outset, let us once again reaffirm our faith in the principles and purposes of the United Nations —  principles of international concord and the maintenance of friendly relations among nations. The Charter is the fundamental declaration of the principles of international conduct. It is based on the rule of law, equal rights for all, non-interference, and respect for the territorial integrity of States. In accordance with the Charter, all States are under the solemn obligation to settle disputes by peaceful means; to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force or any other means inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
71.	In the present troubled state or the world, divergences and disputes among nations are inevitable; but it is feared that their persistence tends to a succession of crises and tensions which give rise to a growing sense of peril. If the world is to live in peace and security, sustained efforts must be made to eliminate mistrust and suspicion among nations, and to remove obstacles to the implementation of the principles of the Charter.
72.	Much discussion has been devoted, during the past years, to the idea of promoting peaceful and neighbourly relations among States, and indeed, the General Assembly, during its twelfth and thirteenth sessions, passed two important resolutions in this regard [resolutions 1236 (XII) and 1301 (XIII)].
73.	As pointed out during the discussions of these two resolutions, peaceful and good-neighbourly relations among nations are a matter of necessity. Failing this, the resources going into the production of terrifying weapons, and their destructive potential place before us the spectra of the annihilation of man.
74.	As a first step, to promote our aim of peaceful mid good-neighbourly relations, every effort should be made to eradicate the cold war in all its manifestations.
75.	One of the manifestations of the cold war is the subversive form of propaganda campaign directed at times by one country against another. My own country has for the past six months been a victim of such a campaign waged persistently and fiercely. It need hardly be said that the state of tension produced by such a campaign is not conducive to good-neighbourly relations. We must, notwithstanding philosophical and ideological differences, refrain in our international relations from any word or deed of a violent nature, either calculated or likely to increase tension. Only then is the way paved for the promotion and development of friendly relations among nations.
76.	It is in this spirit that the Iranian Government welcomes the contacts which are taking place between two great nations in the form of the exchange of visits between the President of the United States of America and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, and we earnestly hope that they will achieve their purpose of lessening international tension and paving the way for effective international co-operation.
77.	I should like to say a few words on the important discussions among the great Powers on Berlin and disarmament.
78.	We noted with satisfaction that the countries concerned in the crisis in Berlin deemed it advisable to resort to negotiation. This is of paramount importance. Although the negotiations were held outside the forum of the United Nations, the first step was taken towards giving effect to the system of law of the United Nations which prescribes settlement of disputes by peaceful means.
79.	Moreover, in seeking a solution of the Berlin question during the Foreign Ministers’ Conference at Geneva, the advisability of utilizing the machinery of the United Nations was frequently admitted.
80.	One constructive suggestion in this direction was the proposal to establish a United Nations group in Berlin to report on propaganda activities which might disrupt public order. We have seen that, in the pattern of the development of the United Nations, the concept of the "United Nations presence” has successfully evolved in recent years and that this concept has rendered most striking service in removing sources of friction among nations. To have carried this. concept to its rightful conclusion, among other methods, the establishment of an impartial body under the aegis of the United Nations to supervise propaganda activities would have had to be considered.
81.	True, that settlement of the Berlin dispute was not achieved, but the Geneva Conference did bring about propitious and satisfactory results — the dissipation of the atmosphere of crisis and the prevention of the dispute from assuming wider proportions. The Conference, moreover, cleared a path for the resumption of negotiations on the quest) of disarmament.
82.	As a result of consultations among the great Powers, agreement was reached for the setting up of at new committee for disarmament negotiations — the Ten-Power Committee. My Government welcomes this initiative leading to the resumption of the consideration of disarmament matters, and is hopeful that the Committee’s deliberations will achieve positive results.
83.	The Iranian Government endorses all negotiations aimed at the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the solution of international problems. However, it could hardly be over-emphasized that all important international questions remain within the purview of the United Nations. Indeed, the United Nations, representing the conscience of the world community and standing above considerations of national interests and prestige, bears the responsibility for international peace and security, including the question of disarmament.
84.	It is noted that the results to be achieved in the deliberations of the Committee will provide a basis for consideration by the Disarmament Commission. This is imperative, and we sincerely hope that the results achieved will assist the Disarmament Commission in its future deliberations.
85.	On the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests, the progress attained has been encouraging. By patience and in a spirit of compromise, the participant scientists reached agreement on methods of banning nuclear weapons tests as well as on a system of detection. The negotiations towards the drawing up of a treaty among the nuclear Powers have made some progress, and it is our ardent hope that they will result in the early conclusion of a treaty. Such meeting of minds on the vital issue of a system of control over the cessation of nuclear tests would facilitate the reaching of final agreement on the disarmament question.
86.	The report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation[A/3838], as studied by the General Assembly last year, revealed the nature and scope of the danger of atomic radiation, and fallout. The conclusions drawn by the Committee left no room for doubt that atomic radiation threatens not only the present generation but future generations as well.
87.	To such a danger the United Nations cannot remain indifferent. The splendid record of our Organization in the humanitarian field calls for a sustained and vigorous effort to eliminate this peril. The Committee, with the assistance of the specialized agencies concerned, must continue its studies and make the results known to the public.
88.	Only agreement among the nuclear Powers to cease the testing of these weapons can ensure the end of this menace. We have been gratified by the public pronouncements of the nuclear Powers to the effect that their ban on the testing of these weapons has been extended. No effort should be spared, however, to attain permanent cessation of such tests.
89.	Yet another important and immediate question which has direct bearing on world security and which must be examined within the sphere of the disarmament question is the prevention of the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons.
90.	The idea of trying to stop the spread of nuclear weapons is an important and responsible one, for it heightens the possibilities of attaining international control at an early stage and mitigates the, dangers of an atmosphere polluted by indiscriminate testing of atomic weapons.
91.	Furthermore, to make the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons conditional upon a general agreement on world disarmament is a dangerous policy. For, once a number of states succeed in acquiring nuclear weapons, international control will be almost beyond attainment. The wider the distribution of these weapons, the greater the risk of a devastating war, to say nothing of the potentially dire consequences of development tests.
92.	All nations are rightly apprehensive of the prospect of a world armed with mass-destruction weapons. We heartily endorse any initiative which would facilitate the conclusion of a general disarmament agreement and relieve the community of nations of the nightmare of a future war. We admit that many difficulties lie ahead, but the stakes are great and the chances of success should not be underestimated. There is no problem for which the art of negotiation cannot find a solution.
93.	Now I should like to turn to some other important subjects on the- agenda of the General Assembly.
94.	The great inspiring event of recent times is man's penetration into outer space, and the opening of a new and challenging horizon for human endeavour. The question of the use made of this new phenomenon is of the utmost international importance.
95.	Our attitude towards this question is based on two fundamental principles: that outer space be used only for peaceful purposes, and, from the outset, space activities be conducted on the basis of law and for the benefit of all.
96.	Moreover, since space exploration is inherently beyond considerations of national boundaries, the entire question of outer space should be approached with a universal outlook. Indeed, it is significant that the idea of international control of outer space has gained ground. The ad hoc Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space has rendered a highly valuable contribution towards international co-operation in this field. We endorse the general conclusions of the Committee, and stress the need for a suitable centre within the framework of the United Nations, serving as the focal point for international co-operation in the use of outer space. It is also important that all developments in connexion with space activities be regularly reviewed by the United Nations.
97.	It is indisputable that man's entry into outer space, if properly exploited, can have most beneficial effects on the progress of human society. The United Nations, as the body representing world opinion, must and indeed has already begun to play an immense role in this sphere and to ensure that the common interest of mankind in outer space be utilized for the prosperity and well-being of the human race.
98.	Another question of great significance and one which cannot be omitted in any discussion of contemporary international life is that of the emergence of nations from foreign domination. In the course of the last decade, a number of nations have gained independence, and more will undoubtedly join in the community of sovereign nations. Indeed, independence movements represent the spirit of our times; they are the logical process of an historical phenomenon, and forces of freedom and social progress constitute a most potent factor in shaping our present and future world.
99.	We welcome the newly-independent nations to our midst in the United Nations and their contribution to the work of our Organization.
100.	As a final item, may I mention another important aspect of the work of the United Nations — the economic fields the 1958 United Nations World Economic Survey indicates that a salient economic feature of the prevailing world situation is the vast and increasing gap between the industrialized and the under-developed countries, and the insufficient demand of the former for the primary commodities of the latter.
101.	Among the generally accepted solutions for this problem, including industrialization, one remedial step, as the Secretary-General suggested, is that the United Nations should now begin to consider dealing more directly with the formulation of a collective international economic policy through consultations with Governments.
102.	For, while the problem of developing a stable economic pattern lies primarily with a given country itself, it cannot be denied that in less-developed countries the need for capital far outweighs the internal governmental and private funds available. Many such countries, among them my own, have taken systematic measures, including legislation, to encourage the inflow of foreign capital investment to supplement finances available for economic development.
103.	In their search for economic advancement, the less-industrialized countries have benefited from the United Nations technical assistance work, and we are anxious to see that work intensified.
104.	Last year the Special Fund was inaugurated — a body designed to expand the field of United Nations technical assistance. This newly-created organ will undoubtedly play an increasingly efficacious part in the process of economic development. The main function of the Special Fund is to bring to light the wealth-producing potential of unsurveyed natural resources in less-industrialized countries and to promote early investment, as well as to establish training and research institutes to take care of yet another crying need, namely, experts and technical know-how.
105.	Iran, for its part, has fully supported the purposes of this Special Fund, and we feel confident that the Fund will be in a position to help implement the economic programmes of the applicant countries.
106.	Moreover, to supplement our international economic co-operation through the United Nations, Iran last year joined the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East. Our association with this Commission has been beneficial in acquainting us with the economic problems of those areas, and from it we have gained valuable experience for our economic activities.
107.	In conclusion, the Iranian delegation, animated by the hopes and expectations which I have just mentioned, expresses the sincere wish that the deliberations of this session of the General Assembly, striving as always for peace and justice, will be crowned with success.