81.	The delegation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has the honour to present to this General Assembly its views on certain important problems of the world, some of which are of direct concern to my country as a part of the Arab homeland and some of concern to all of us as members of the family of nations.
82.	Before doing so, Mr. President, my delegation wishes to extend to you its sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency of the fourteenth General Assembly by a unanimous vote. Your brilliant career at the United Nations and valuable contributions to its achievements are widely known. We hope that this session will be marked, under your leadership, with real success.
83.	The fourteen years following the establishment of this great Organization have provided the family of nations with the most effective forum for their meetings, consultations and discussions. Thus in this Assembly the idea of coming together developed side by side with the ever-growing understanding of the purposes of the United Nations Charter. The tasks of the United Nations are great, but the greatest is its task to lay the foundations of an everlasting peace for the succeeding generations and the days to come, and thus record in the annals of history the real meaning of human progress.
84.	If civilization is truly to advance in our present age, it should not only manifest itself in remarkable inventions and conquests, but should capture the soul and mind of man. Present-day achievements cannot hope to surpass the old legacy if material standards supersede spiritual values, if considerations of profit and gain overshadow humanitarian principles, and if force and the threat of force continue to challenge the power of right and justice.
85.	We, the so-called weak Powers or smaller nations, live in this world equipped with such thoughts, an equipment which provides us with adequate force and sufficient power. We have the firm conviction that good conquers evil, love dispels hate, and hope defeats despair. We come to the United Nations as groups and teams working together to extinguish the flame of hatred in the hearts of men and there to establish brotherhood and peace among all. Inasmuch as it meets with our natural and genuine aims, we believe that international peace is the best security for small nations to enjoy a quiet and prosperous life.
86.	Recent developments in the field of international understanding between the big Powers have been heartening to all peace-loving nations. My country welcomed these events no less than did any other. Apart from their world-wide impact, these events will no doubt have a favourable reaction in the Middle East, the region to which my country belongs, and to a certain extent they help to alleviate the tension which is partly due to the East-West conflict.
87.	It was indeed gratifying to us to know of the meetings of the Four Power Foreign Ministers' Conference at Geneva in an attempt to come to an understanding on several issues. Although the discussion there seems to have faltered and revealed differences of view, the promising feature was that the parties attempted to find ways and means of relaxing tension in their relations.
88.	On the subject of disarmament, which was the main topic of discussion among the big Powers, the Jordanian delegation feels that the establishment of a Ten-Power Committee was a practical and constructive step toward drawing up a disarmament plan. Lacking the full representation of all Member States, which have much to say about this vital issue, the committee established a link with the Disarmament Commission in such a way as; to make up for what it lacked and to recognize the ultimate responsibility of the United Nations in this important matter.
89.	Although no concrete conclusions have yet been achieved on the subject of disarmament, the impressive development along this line is that this issue is moving ahead in all directions to find a definite, practical and effective method for serving this purpose. Various proposals have been put before this Assembly for consideration. In the discussion of these proposals, one has to judge them on their practicality and feasibility.
90.	Talks about the suspension and cessation of nuclear tests are of equal importance to all nations and all men. No one would like to see himself and his race destroyed by his own invention; no one can accept the thought of humanity being driven toward mass destruction. We earnestly hope that the nations possessing nuclear weapons will finally agree to put an end to this evil device and turn it to peaceful uses for the betterment of life.
91.	In this connexion, a setback for our hopes and a challenge to the joint efforts in the direction of banning nuclear tests is to be found in the intentions of the French Government to explode an atomic bomb in the African Sahara, thus exposing the inhabited areas in that region to thermonuclear fallout and its fatal dangers. It becomes the imperative task of the United Nations to see to it that nuclear tests are not carried out.
92.	Needless to say, the responsibilities of the United Nations are considerably and systematically increasing. In view of such additional tasks and in order to relieve the General Assembly, it becomes essential to settle the pending problems at the United Nations. There are problems that have been solved by the World Organization, and problems that still await solution.
93.	My country was happy to know of the settlement of the Cyprus question. The wisdom, sincerity and determination shown by both the Greek and the Turkish Governments, and the co-operation of the United Kingdom Government, brought about a solution satisfactory to the gallant people of Cyprus and gratifying to all those who are linked with the Turks and the Greeks by strong bonds of friendship.
94.	The problem of West Irian, although not included on our agenda this year, will always be of deep concern to the Jordanian Government because of the merits of the question, the justice of the cause and my country’s cordial relations with the Indonesian Republic.
95.	Many other important matters have been dealt with satisfactorily through the efforts of the United Nations. Yet major international questions are still pending and call for speedy action.
96.	In the Arab world, which stretches from the Iranian borders to the Atlantic Coast, there lie the most serious political problems of the present time. In Algeria, a war is taking place between two powers — the national power of Algeria, represented by the Algerian Provisional Government, and the French Imperialistic power. This war has been led by the National Liberation Front to seek fulfilment of definite and legitimate aims for the people of Algeria — namely, freedom, independence and sovereignty. The fighting has been going on vigorously for almost five years, and on a wide scale. There can be no better expression of a nation’s will to attain its aspirations than its willingness to pay the price of those aspirations in terms of blood and tears. Procession after procession of martyrs has traveled the road of national struggle in Algeria against French colonialism and tyranny. There can be no better proof of the strength of the Algerian patriotic cause, and of its deep roots in Algeria, than the fact that the national revolution continues with the passage of time to gain more prestige and greater international weight, to such a point that it has now become universally recognized. France itself has been the last to recognize the international weight of the great Algerian problem.
97.	When my delegation deals with the problem of Algeria, it deals not only with an Arab national problem inflicted on the Arabs in their homeland or with an anti-colonial issue, but with a problem whose magnitude places it far beyond these limitations. It is the problem of freedom in general, of liberty in its wider sense, of courage, of honour and of human dignity.
98.	If we as Members of the United Nations, subscribing to its great Charter, are not to defend these values and live up to our humanitarian responsibilities, then what is it that we cherish and what is it that we live up to? The Arab blood which is being shed in Algeria and the sufferings which are taking place there at the hands of the French are the sacrifices of the true sons of Algeria for all mankind at the altar of liberty.
99.	It would be a grave injustice to the Algerian problem and its real significance to reduce it to an ordinary political question which is subject to views and counterviews and to different possibilities and considerations. I cannot imagine that there is any power on earth that would dare to deny the right of nations to freedom and independence or dare to advocate the supremacy of one nation over another nation. If such a power exists, then it has no place in this Assembly.
100.	Engaged in a sacred war against the French colonial forces, the Algerian nationalists would rather reach their goals of independence and peace in the shortest way, in the earliest time, and with the minimum of sacrifice. No other party could be more keen on restoring peace in Algeria than the Algerian people themselves who are dedicated to the prosperity and glory of their homeland. Therefore, the responsibility of lengthening the term of bloodshed in Algeria rests solely and entirely with France itself, which has obstinately determined to suppress the national uprising in Algeria by the force of arms.
101.	Instead of honouring the heroism of the Algerian struggle for freedom, instead of acceding to the demand of justice and instead of heeding the call, of right, France chooses to intensify its so-called programme of pacification.
102.	In order to facilitate the purpose of ending the war in Algeria, a solution must be real and democratic. This will require, on the one hand, clarity in the substance of such a solution and, on the other, negotiations with the recognized leaders of the national movement of Algeria.
103.	A constructive step in this direction is bound to open the way for a peaceful settlement of the dispute between the two parties concerned. It is not the intention of the Jordanian delegation to dwell now on the French atrocities in Algeria and the duties of the United Nations in this regard. We will come to that in future discussions.
104.	A great international problem in the Arab world is that of Palestine. It is most regrettable that the Palestine question in its present phase was the creation of this very Organization. While the Palestine tragedy continues to live, the United Nations continues to fail in settling the question. The story, in brief, is one of an invader who enjoys the life of usurpation, and a victim who suffers the bitterness of deprivation.
105.	The aspects of the problem are so interconnected that no one issue can be dealt with independently or separately. The territorial aspect, the refugee problem, the problem of refugee property in the Israeli-held part of Palestine, the general political conduct of Israel in the Arab environment, and the Israeli threat to the Arabs are all branches of the same trunk. The wrong that had been done to the Arabs produced such multiple complications as to make it impossible for them to withdraw to a line at which they could surrender to what might ever be considered as an accomplished fact.
106.	Eleven years have passed since the fall of that dear part of Arab Palestine into the hands of the Zionist invaders. What has the United Nations accomplished in the way of redress for the Palestine refugees? What new hopes has the United Nations given to the dispersed people of Palestine? What action has the United Nations taken against the challenge and defiance of Israel? Eleven years have passed and the yearning of those refugees to go back to their homeland has never diminished. They see it across the Armistice Demarcation Line. They look at it from over the hills and villages which were separated from the plains and shores of Palestine. They feel the breeze that touches its green orchards. They recall their days and memories. It is a great strain for the refugee to stand by and see his property, his house, his farm, his village and his country usurped by strangers who flocked, there from every corner of the world.
107.	In appraising this emotional inner struggle, one would easily understand why the refugees sometimes think of marching peacefully to their homeland. The refugees right to return can never be weakened no matter how old the problem might be nor how long the years of exile might seem. The bitterness of the catastrophe shall be handed from father to son and the desire of repatriation shall always be cherished until it becomes a reality.
108.	The United Nations, which reaffirmed this right of repatriation in its successive resolutions, must see to the implementation of these resolutions. It is to safeguard the prestige and authority of this Organization that the defiance of Israel should come to an end.
109.	A further serious difficulty introduced by Israel to the region in general and directed against the interests of Palestine Arab refugees in particular is the continuous flow of the Jewish immigrants into the Israeli-held territory. In addition to the hundreds of thousands of Jewish immigrants who were brought to Palestine by Israel since 1948, Israel plans to bring an additional one million immigrants to live in the territory which it now occupies. This policy has two sharp spearheads. First, it blocks the way and closes the door in the face of the return of the Arab refugees to their homes, and secondly, it creates apprehensions amongst Arab people that Israel plans further territorial expansion in the area through increasing its population.
110.	The continued overflow of Jewish immigration is a serious threat to Arab security and Arab existence. In view of the consequences of this Israeli policy, peace-loving nations are requested, for the sake of peace and order, not to facilitate this Jewish movement from their countries. However, the item on our agenda pertaining to the Palestine question is item 27 [United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East:  (a) Report of the Director of the Agency; (b) Proposals for the continuation of United Nations assistance to Palestine refugees: document submitted by the Secretary-General]. The Jordanian Government has given the Annual Report of the Secretary-General on the Work of the Organization [A/ 4132] its full consideration. My delegation is in the process of submitting the views of my Government on this report in a fully detailed document.
111.	Meanwhile, the Jordanian delegation deems it necessary at this stage to state that there are certain basic principles in the problem of the Arab refugees to which my Government strongly adheres. First, this problem cannot be isolated from the main Palestine question, being an inseparable part of the whole. Second, the problem is political in nature, not economic. Therefore, no economic approach to this political problem could be acceptable to us. Third, the right of the refugees to return to their homeland can in no way be challenged, and the refugees must be enabled to exercise this legitimate right. Fourth, the relief and services extended to the Palestine refugees shall continue to be the responsibility of the United Nations until it becomes possible for these refugees to enjoy their legitimate rights.
112.	Our devotion to the cause of Palestine Arab refugees leads us to feel with the world refugee wherever he might be, and to try to extend to him a helping hand. A problem directly related to the Palestine issue and one of its ramifications is Israel’s navigation in the Suez Canal. This matter has been given wide misleading propaganda by the Israelites. The Suez Canal falls within Arab soil and under the sovereignty of an Arab State. The United Arab Republic, like every other Arab country, is not only in a state of war with Israel, but also does not recognize the legality of Israel and Palestine, nor any right it might claim in the region.
113.	Furthermore, Israel itself is still denying all the legitimate Arab rights in Palestine, its rights that were reaffirmed by the various United Nations resolutions pertaining to the Palestine question. How could it then claim any right at a time when it denies the rights of others?
114.	The Jordanian delegation wishes to state on this occasion that the stand of the Jordanian Kingdom on this issue goes side by side with that of the United Arab Republic all the way. In taking a unified stand on the cases of Algeria, Palestine, the Suez Canal and ether problems in the Arab region, the Arab States are prompted by their sincere desire to exterminate aggression and the forces of aggression from their homeland and to live in freedom, quiet said in peace. Led by their constructive national movement and by their ambitions to carry out their international responsibilities as a useful Power, they have come to realize that their unity is essential for their progress. They have always felt the importance of safeguarding the League of Arab States. In fact, the strengthening of the brotherly relations among them was the central aim of the Charter of the Arab League,
115.	On the other hand, unity among the Arab States will enable them to provide the world with a strong friend capable of carrying out its international obligations in the best effective manner. Stretching its arms in to Asia and Africa, the Arab world has the strongest ties with both continents. The Jordanian Kingdom is very happy and privileged to belong to that group of the nations of Asia and Africa, and to work with them at the United Nations and elsewhere in full co-operation and harmony. The growing increase in the number of independent States in Africa is a remarkable development for which we wholeheartedly rejoice. We eagerly look forward to seeing amongst us here in this General Assembly the rest of the African nations, some of whom presently are under trusteeship, and some others are striving for independence and sovereignty.
116.	The growth and size of United Nations membership leads us to the consideration of the revision of the Charter in a way which would meet the requirements of this growth in size and change in conditions. Jordan is a young country which needs technical and financial assistance to develop further its resources. The aid which the United Nations extends to us is highly appreciated by my Government. However, there are still wide fields of development which need substantial contributions from the United Nations and its agencies. We are undertaking huge economic responsibilities in view of the exceptional circumstances which the country faces. It is our sincere hope that the United Nations and its agencies will take this particular situation into sympathetic consideration. The presence of the United Nations in Jordan is a matter of deep appreciation to my Government and my people, and the contributions of the Secretary-General toward stability and relaxation of tension in our region shall never be forgotten.
117.	Jordan is also a small country but proud to be the cradle of the spiritual values and the protector of the Holy Shrine. We have proved to be loyal to the principles and ideals of the United Nations Charter and worthy of defending the cause of peace in our land and our area.