125.	Mr. President, may I express to you the hearty congratulations of my delegation on your unanimous election to the presidency of the fourteenth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. All of us fully recognize the great contributions you have made to the United Nations since its birth. My delegation, in particular, remembers with gratification the assistance you gave my country at the time of its admission to the United Nations.
126.	At this opening of the fourteenth session of the General Assembly, I wish to appeal to all nations that the time is now at hand when all of us must even more seriously strain our efforts to relieve international tensions and promote world peace.
127.	The foremost factor which today disturbs the cause of peace is the continuing conflict between the free world and the communist world. This conflict stems from their basically different political philosophies. And this situation is further aggravated by the feeling of distrust which one has toward the other.
128.	The free world to which my country belongs seeks the establishment of a democratic order based on freedom, and justice. It is our position that world peace also must be founded on such a basis. The peace the communist world talks about may be basically different from the peace which we are endeavouring to establish. But even though a basic difference exists, the fact cannot be denied that the two worlds are existing side by side. Since this is so, bur efforts for the maintenance of peace must be directed toward dissolving mutual distrust and relieving tensions. For this purpose we must utilize every opportunity to find concrete and workable measures. In this nuclear age, ushered in by the phenomenal developments in military science, when our civilization and indeed mankind itself face the threat of complete destruction should there be a single miscalculation, we cannot emphasize enough the urgency and primacy of such efforts.
129.	If we are to find feasible measures for relaxing tensions, the mere talking about peace will get us nowhere; our will for peace must be backed by deeds. As a guide line, the United Nations Charter lays down the "principle of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. The settlement of such disputes, not by the threat or use of force, but by the peaceful means of discussion, is a natural, universal obligation which extends beyond the United Nations and its Members. Also essential to the maintenance of peace is for all countries in their international relations to respect one another's political position. It is necessary for every country strictly to refrain from acts, whether director indirect, to apply pressure on or hi interfere in the affairs of another country for the purpose of extending its own interests or influence.
130.	In connexion with what I have just said, I should like to say that I warmly welcome the present exchange of visits of the top leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union. I earnestly hope that by frank exchanges of views they will be able to remove their feeling of distrust and that they will, by finding a basis for the solution of problems under conditions to which they both agree, make substantial contributions to the relieving of the international tensions which now plague the world. I wish especially to stress this hope because they are the two leading Powers of the world.
131.	The existence of divided States, which has come about as an unfortunate consequence of the East-West conflict, is a problem of major importance. What my country wishes particularly to point out is that there are divided States in close proximity to us. I earnestly hope that these countries will soon achieve reunification by peaceful and democratic processes, for this will contribute to the cause of peace.
132.	The mutual distrust, between the free world and the communist world shows itself in the form of arms competition. The arms race further intensifies distrust, creating a vicious circle which knows no end. Such an arms competition not only results in a meaningless waste of valuable human and economic resources, but also increases the possibilities of miscalculation which may well result in war. I cannot help but feel a deep sense of concern over this situation, for today military science has so advanced as to produce nuclear weapons with the awesome capability of bringing swift and general destruction to mankind and to civilization itself,
133.	It is my hope that the interested Powers will put an end to the vicious circle of mutual distrust and arms competition. This can only be accomplished by vigorous and constructive negotiations for feasible, if only limited, disarmament measures, thus creating mutual confidence and laying the groundwork for subsequent steps toward general disarmament. In this sense, we welcome the agreement reached between East and West on the occasion of the four-Power Foreign Ministers’ Conference concerning the creation of a new disarmament negotiating body outside the United Nations as an earnest of their desire to further disarmament negotiations. I deeply deplore the fact that disarmament negotiations in the United Nations have been stalled since 1957, and so I appeal vigorously to the new negotiating body to discuss the problems of disarmament from a fresh standpoint and to devote its utmost efforts to producing early and substantial results. It goes without saying that disarmament is predicated upon agreement between the major Powers, but it is also a matter of vital interest and concern to all United Nations Members. For instance, in the establishment of an effective system of control and supervision for the execution of disarmament measures, the co-operation of the United Nations and its Member States is indispensable. Moreover, it is also a fact that modern weapons are a cause of deep anxiety to countries other than the Powers concerned. I hope that an appropriate link is established between the new negotiating body and the United Nations and that consideration will be given to such arrangements as will enable the desires of all Members of the United Nations to be fully reflected in the discussions of that body.
134.	What my delegation strongly and expectantly hopes will be the touchstone that will advance the new disarmament negotiations is the early conclusion of an agreement for the suspension of nuclear weapons tests. From experience and from a feeling for the good of humanity growing out of that experience, the people and Government of Japan have consistently opposed any kind of nuclear weapons testing by any country. We will continue to take this position. My delegation has, at every opportunity, appealed for the conclusion of an early agreement for the suspension of nuclear testing as having priority over disarmament measures. At the General Assembly last year our country, with Austria and Sweden, co-sponsored a draft resolution to wish success to the Geneva Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapons Tests. The General Assembly adopted the resolution [resolution 1252 B (XIII)], and the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union have carried on negotiations since last year. In commending them for their efforts, I wish to express our satisfaction at the fact that since the end of last year no testing of nuclear weapons has taken place anywhere in the world. At the same time, it is our earnest hope that, given the opportunity afforded by the exchange of visits between the top leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union, at least a way will be opened for an early settlement of the question of nuclear tests suspension.
135.	This Organization is playing a signal role to relieve international tensions by its efforts to promote mutual understanding through "open diplomacy". Through "quiet diplomacy”—the personal contacts between the permanent missions and the good offices rendered by the Secretary-General—the United Nations is also playing an equally notable role in the maintenance of peace. It is my firm belief that the United Nations, through its organization and functions, will continue to increase in stature and importance as the world’s foremost agency for peace.
136.	The speedy action recently taken by the United Nations to meet the situation in Laos was most appropriate and laudable as a first step toward restoring tranquillity. To co-operate with the United Nations in this action is, I believe, the natural duty of its Members.
137.	In another field, the United Nations since the thirteenth session of the General Assembly has made a most timely move in taking up problems relating to the peaceful uses of outer space to meet the recent notable advances made by science. The problems related to these developments will mount in importance as science extends man's horizon to the great beyond, making increasingly desirable the co-operation of the Powers concerned under the aegis of the United Nations.
138.	While noting the accomplishments of the United Nations, we must also recognize the fact that the Organization has been prevented from fully exercising the functions originally intended for it because of the limitations imposed upon it by the international situation — the East-West conflict. We must admit also that on occasion there has been a tendency for the United Nations to be utilized as a forum for selfish propaganda and fruitless academic discussion. So that the United Nations can overcome the East-West conflict and truly become a powerful organization for the maintenance of peace, so that it can become the centre for the exchange of responsible views to effect a practical and constructive settlement of problems, I want to emphasize the need for positive co-operation among the Members toward strengthening the organization and functions of the United Nations and toward its effective use.
139.	In this connexion, I am in agreement in principle with the views expressed by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report. I also believe that it is not without meaning that continued study should be made of such means for the maintenance of peace as the "United Nations presence” and a "United Nations peace force."
140.	Going even further, it is my belief that, in order to contribute to making the United Nations a more effective organization for the maintenance of peace, the Charter should be revised at the earliest possible occasion. The present Charter was written fourteen years ago. Not only has the membership of the Organization vastly increased, but many new situations unforeseen at the time have arisen. As revision of the Charter involves many difficulties and would require considerable time and patience, I want to call upon the Members to commence the task of revision at the earliest opportunity.
141.	I have thus far expressed some of my hopes concerning the political and military aspects of the maintenance and promotion of peace. I would now like to speak from the standpoint of economic and social developments, which constitute the material sinews of world peace. The United Nations has made splendid contributions in the economic and social fields. Yet, there is no denying that there is still much more to be done. Perhaps the most conspicuous recent trend in the world economy is the ever-increasing gap between the rate of economic growth of the advanced nations and that of the under-developed countries, which depend upon the production of the primary commodities, and the ever-growing disparity in living standards between these two groups of nations. We cannot overlook the fact that for the under-developed countries such a trend means the unabated prevalence of hunger and disease, as well as the continued inadequacy of education and social welfare services, all of which cause serious social unrest. It is feared that such a situation, if left unimproved, will in the long run impede the economic and social progress of the world as a whole and will eventually become a factor disturbing to world peace. There is, therefore, an urgent necessity for the under-developed countries to redouble their efforts towards the acceleration of their economic growth, and for the advanced nations to assist them in their efforts. However, the difficulties the newly developing countries encounter in their efforts cannot be belittled.
142.	Being a country which accomplished its industrialization within a comparatively short period, Japan understands the problems which confront the underdeveloped countries and sympathizes with them in their efforts to overcome these problems. The diversification of the economy is one way to accelerate economic growth in these countries. But it can only be effected by solving, without delay, such problems of great magnitude as that of how to acquire necessary industrial technology and managerial know-how and especially that of how to bring in necessary amounts of capital, to name only two. The developing nations want help in their efforts to solve these problems and it is up to the advanced nations to assist them. In extending assistance, however, due respect must be given to the position and wishes of the receiving countries, and such assistance should never be utilized as a tool for waging the cold war.
143.	The expansion of trade is another problem as essential as economic development of under-developed countries for world economic development. I shall not dwell today upon this problem of trade expansion, except to comment on one of its many aspects.
144.	We see these days efforts being made to establish regional trade arrangements. Economic integrations which remove trade barriers within the region deserve serious consideration from the standpoint of trade expansion, but it would be most deplorable if these economic integrations degenerate into "compartmentalism", creating conflicts with countries outside the region. I hope, so that such conflicts may be avoided, that the United Nations will play a valuable role as a forum for the adjustment of divergent interests.
145.	In recent years the various agencies of the United Nations have been studying the problems of the impact of population increase on economic and social developments. It is my hope that the United Nations will go a step further and undertake research into the basic problems related to the induction of human resources, including technical personnel, such as are necessary for purposes of economic development in accordance with the wishes of the countries concerned. If, as a result of such a study, a deeper understanding of the problems of immigration is also promoted among the countries concerned, a great service will be rendered not only to economic development, but also, in no small measure, to the promotion of friendly relations among the countries concerned and to peace in the international community.
146.	It is in accordance with the basic views I have expressed that my delegation will participate in the deliberations of the present session of the General Assembly and thereby co-operate with the United Nations in line with our basic foreign policy.
147.	In closing, may I express my earnest hope that the present session of the Assembly, under your chairmanship, Mr. President, will be a most fruitful and successful one.