59. Mr. President, it is with much regret that we have heard of the slight indisposition Of Mr. Belaúnde, the President of the Assembly. We wish for his speedy recovery and hope that my delegation’s sincere congratulations on his election to the presidency of the fourteenth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations will be conveyed to him. We take note that he is one of the very few representatives who has had the distinguished honour of bating his country’s representative in San Francisco in 1945, and who still remains with the Organization up to the present as a representative. With his ability and wide experience in United Nations affairs, as well as his advocacy of liberty and justice, we are positive that he will justify and satisfactorily execute the enormous and heavy responsibilities which the Assembly has unanimously entrusted to him.
60.	Man’s attempt to conquer the forces of nature is coeval with his existence. Concurrently he has sought to create a society where he could live in peace. His creative genius in bringing the former nearer to fruition seems to be far in advance of the latter. Why is man so slow in developing a peaceful atmosphere for himself? Is it because he has not yet learned how to live in harmony with his fellowmen? This difficulty which entered into inter-state relations has been so compounded that some States believed that their security lay in increasing their own power and in preventing the increase in power of their rivals even at the risk of war.
61.	Man, however, abhors war and with the advance in its destructive nature and the increase in the civilized character of human relations and the concern for humanity itself, he has sought to extend the reign of law, of international order and peace. The end of the Second World War brought great hope to mankind through the Organization of the United Nations. This body is admittedly the greatest international pyramid of peace ever founded by man. It is therefore our wish that the United Nations will long remain man’s greatest hope for world peace and world brotherhood.
62.	Most of the items on the agenda of the present session are concerned with the fundamental rights of men. On every continent men are standing up boldly for their right to be free and to exercise that freedom in the interest of their personal and collective progress, advancement and security. Fully cognizant of this fact, the Government and people of Liberia are earnestly endeavouring in their day-to-day activities to preserve and protect these inherent rights of man.
63.	Human rights under the concept of the United Nations are designed to safeguard for all time man's heritage of basic rights and fundamental freedom. This struggle for human rights is as old as humanity. Its existence can be traced to the great law-givers, from the time of Hammurabi, who have sought by legal means to protect the weak against oppression by the strong. This concept has followed the changes of time and has reached this Organization in the form of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This ideal should be the goal of all States Members of the United Nations.
64.	Let us remember that no nation or race can achieve progress when its people are governed in a manner which deprives them of their fundamental right to be free and to exercise their freedom in the interest of their personal and collective progress, advancement and security. Permit me to emphasize that it is the position of the Liberian Government that all men and nations who know the value of liberty and enjoy the great blessing of freedom and self-determination are doubly obligated to guarantee and extend without fear, discrimination or favour these identical rights and benefits to all subjective peoples wherever they may be scattered throughout the world., Our universe will never be safe as long as any members of the human family, no matter how few, are deprived of these natural and inalienable rights.
65.	Turning now to the rising tide of nationalism in the continent of Africa and those parts of the earth where men are still being denied these rights and privileges by sheer means of force and might for personal gains and national aggrandizement, we are convinced of the pressing necessity for evolving some satisfactory formula to relieve this unjust situation. Until this is done, we wonder how the nations here assembled in this international Organization, whose prime purpose is to maintain world peace, can expect ever to attain that professed goal. There can be no peace without good will based upon a deep and abiding consciousness and regard for the rights of others, be they high or low, rich or poor, white or black, yellow or brown, and whether they emanate from the north, south, east or west. A willingness to safeguard and respect the fundamental rights of all men is essential to our quest for the solutions to complex problems.
66.	The approach of the Liberian delegation to many of the problems which will come up before this session of the Assembly will be largely influenced by those principles which I have just restated.
67.	The Liberian Government and people stand as one of the proponents of the right of the people of Algeria to self-determination, freedom and independence. This right is in keeping with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which all Member States should uphold, and it must be considered to be a fundamental and basic right of man. The question whether or not a discussion of the Algerian problem is a matter solely within the domestic jurisdiction of a colonizing Power is, in the opinion of the Liberian delegation, dwarfed by the immensity and magnitude of the substance involved, as well as by the fact that it is a disturbing threat to world peace which the United Nations seeks to preserve and maintain. The Algerian people have only asked for themselves the right to, and benefits of, the same privileges that each of us — States Members of the United Nations — enjoy. If we enjoy these rights and regard them as inherent and fundamental for ourselves, why should we not honestly and forthrightly see that they are extended and accorded to the Algerian people.
68.	At the recent conference of the Foreign Ministers of the independent States of Africa held in Monrovia, the Liberian Government explained that one of the fundamental policies which the Liberian Government has supported is that every people has a right to institute a Government and to choose and adopt whatever form of Government it desires. The Liberian Government considers this right inherent and inalienable, and it cannot be denied without the grossest injustice. The Liberian Government also recognized the complexity of the Algerian problem and deplored the use of threats to influence the opinion of other countries. It is the view of the Liberian delegation that the time is opportune for the United Nations to explore the possibility of a settlement of what is considered a grievous and tragic situation.
69.	These principles which we believe should apply to Algeria are equally applicable to the problems in East, Central and South Africa. We cannot accept the theory that any portion of Africa is an integral part of any other continent. Such a fiction is no solution to the grave problem of freedom and human rights which are involved in these areas.
70.	We are concerned about the imprisonment of African leaders and of attempts to force on a people something which they have clearly indicated they do not want.
71.	While the European minorities that have settled in African territories have to be protected, this should not be done to the detriment of the African majorities who are the real owners of the territories.
72.	In addition, there is the problem of the Territory of South West Africa. We have read with interest and concern the report of the United Nations Good Offices Committee on South West Africa [A/4224], but we maintain that the United Nations cannot relinquish its moral and legal responsibilities to the indigenous inhabitants of this Territory, for they are entitled to the same treatment as those of other Trust Territories.
73.	The “apartheid” policy practiced by a Member State is an evil against which this Organization should speak and act. Any attempt to limit or to thwart basic rights due to people in any part of the world constitutes a denial of justice to them and a danger to those of us who are now enjoying such rights.
74.	It is to be regretted that discrimination against ships and cargoes passing through the Suez Canal is being applied. A Liberian ship has suffered this fate. One of the primary objectives of the United Nations is the bringing together of nations at this forum so that by contact, communication, interchange and exchange of courtesies and opinions a spirit of camaraderie, friendship, understanding and good relationship between Member States and all nations of the world will be engendered. The Liberian Delegation therefore hopes that a speedy solution to the problem will be found.
75.	The problem of disarmament has been discussed for many years, but no solution has been reached. Fears and suspicions still hover around us and we have to seek to remove the causes which create distrust and tension so that progress towards disarmament may be made possible.
76.	A ray of hope resulted from the fact that, during the recent discussions in Geneva, the nuclear Powers have refrained from the testing of nuclear weapons. We are pleased to observe that the test ban has been extended while those Powers are still exploring the possibilities of reaching agreement.
77.	In spite of this, testing of nuclear weapons in the Sahara has been proposed and it has aroused the  indignation of all Africans, who have raised strong protests against this. When other nuclear Powers, in the interest of human welfare and well-being, have stopped testing nuclear weapons, we wonder why any Power should desire to conduct new tests. Statements that these tests will not be harmful are not sufficiently reassuring, since all of us know that man has not yet progressed to the extent that he is able to control nature. The Liberian delegation therefore hopes that plans for nuclear explosions in the Sahara will be abandoned.
78.	The Liberian Government, like all other countries desiring peace welcomed the meeting of President Eisenhower and Mr. Khrushchev. It has been greatly impressed by the statements made by both of these gentlemen in regard to peace and international problems. It is the hope of my Government that the new hope thus inspired and the recommendations put forward not only by these two Powers, but all suggestions from delegations on disarmament should be taken together and agreement sought. From this point of view, the Liberian Government has noted the request by the delegation of the Soviet Union [A/4218], which has been approved by the General Committee and endorsed by the General Assembly, for inclusion on the agenda of this Assembly of Mr. Khrushchev's recommendations concerning disarmament. The Liberian Government feels that the proposal made by Mr. Khrushchev offers an opportunity for discussion and should, like other proposals made by other countries on disarmament, be welcomed, thoroughly investigated and discussed.
79.	In conclusion, my delegation sincerely hopes that this fourteenth session of the General Assembly will reach decisions and agreement on the problems with which we are faced that will inure to the benefit of mankind.