1.	First of all, I should like to offer the most sincere congratulations on my own behalf and on behalf of my delegation to Mr. Belaúnde on his unanimous election to the Presidency of the General Assembly at its fourteenth session. The great honour conferred upon him by the General Assembly and the confidence it has shown in electing him to direct its proceedings are amply justified not only by his wide knowledge and his long and distinguished record of service to the international community but also by his personal qualities, his kindliness and his courtesy.
2.	It also gives my delegation great satisfaction to have this opportunity of paying a tribute to his great country and to Latin America in general, to its gallant peoples, their advanced civilization and their glorious struggle for the realization of human Values, liberty and independence. The names of Bolivar and other Illustrious figures of the American continent have gloriously resounded in the history of mankind and find their faithful echo in the present renascence of Asia, the Arab world and the African continent.
3.	In the similarity of our position and our problems, our common aspiration and ideals, we have found a source of inspiration for establishing and strengthening the ties of mutual understanding and fruitful cooperation which are so important for the future development of our peoples and for the firm, establishment of world peace and security. My delegation therefore expresses the sincere wish that Mr. Belaúnde will perform these high international functions with his customary wisdom and serenity, thus ensuring the good conduct of the proceedings of this important session, about which he has expressed the hope that it may become an “Assembly of peace".
4.	My delegation was deeply distressed to hear of the death in such tragic circumstances of Mr. Bandaranaike, the Prime Minister of Ceylon, and of the natural catastrophes which have befallen Japan, causing the loss of many lives and a considerable amount of damage. To the delegations of these two friendly States, Ceylon and Japan, we should like to extend our deepest sympathy.
5.	The delegation of the United Kingdom of Libya to the fourteenth session of the General Assembly is happy to greet the delegations of other States Members of the United Nations and, while assuring them of its closest and most loyal co-operation, wishes this session of the Assembly the greatest harmony in its deliberations and every success in accomplishing its purposes.
6. My delegation is honoured to have the opportunity of expressing from this world rostrum, on behalf of the King of Libya, his people and his Government, the most sincere good wishes for the progress, prosperity and peace of all the United Nations and of all those peoples of the world who cherish the ideals, purposes and principles which inspire and guide the efforts of men and nations of good will.
7.	The United Kingdom of Libya, which is keenly anxious for conditions of lasting peace to be established in the world, has closely followed world events and international relations since the last session of the Assembly. The course of relations between East and West has been a frequent source of danger to world peace and security and has thus given all peoples justifiable cause for alarm and apprehension. These fears and anxieties have been shared by Libya, which, like all other peace-loving nations, hopes that wisdom and good will can triumph over obstinacy and tension.
8.	The people of Libya would like the two opposing blocs to resolve their differences through the peaceful methods set forth in the Charter as essential for the settlement of international problems in a world which desires to be orderly and civilized. The Libyan Government therefore followed with interest the proceedings of the Four Power Foreign Ministers Conference that was held at Geneva in recent months. However slight the success of that Conference may have been, the Libyan Government feels that no effort should be spared to continue the discussions in an attempt to find a peaceful solution of the Berlin question and some means of reconciling the different points of view concerning the reunification of Germany, As progress in the relations between East and West depends essentially on the relations between the two dominant Powers in the world today, namely, the United States and the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom of Libya has been favourably impressed by the new phase apparently beginning in the relationship between these two Powers. The opportunities which, within the framework of the exchange of visits between the President of the United States and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, are offered to responsible statesmen of the two countries should bring about personal contacts and exchanges of views which may usefully serve the cause of peace and understanding throughout the world. My delegation hopes that this exchange of visits will pave the way for an understanding beneficial to all sides, will facilitate the work of this session and will help to supply some of the elements which could lead to a solution of serious outstanding problems.
9.	The United Kingdom of Libya, born under the auspices of the United Nations, has been guided since the proclamation of its independence, by a sincere desire and determination to adhere faithfully to the ideals and principles of the international organization within which it first saw the light of day as an independent and sovereign State. Our loyalty to the United Nations, which was able to find a fair and just solution to our own difficulties, is strengthened by the firm belief that as an international organization it is an essential instrument for the maintenance of world peace and security and for the promotion of understanding and co-operation between nations. Moreover, as a forum where international problems are discussed in all their aspects, the United Nations remains the final court of appeal of oppressed peoples and sustains their hope of enjoying their essential liberties and human dignity.
10.	My delegation believes that the authority and survival of the United Nations depend primarily on the development of the universal aspect of the Organization and that any revision of the Charter would be justified if it tended to make the Organization more democratic and all its Members equal within its principal organs. These are, we feel, the considerations that should form the basis of our discussion of the agenda items relating to an increase in the number of non-permanent members of the Security Council [agenda item 19], the members of the Economic and Social Council [agenda item 20] and the judges of the International Court of Justice [agenda item 21].
11.	It is with full awareness of its international responsibilities and with the greatest respect for the Spirit and the letter of the Charter that Libya continues to deal with and settle the many problems which have confronted it in the sphere of foreign relations in the first years following its entry into the growing family oi nations. While anxious first and foremost to safeguard its territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty, as well as its freedom of policy and actions, Libya wishes to maintain with the Western Powers relations based on understanding, mutual respect and propriety. These cordial relations are dominated, as far as Libya is concerned, by its unshakable determination to work for the establishment of the principles of self-determination and liberty which our Charter obliges us. to promote, and by its unequivocal views on problems concerning human rights, a matter which I propose later to treat at greater length in stating my country’s opinion on various relevant questions. I hasten to say that I shall endeavour to do so with complete detachment and with the sole aim of contributing as constructively as possible to the solution of problems that have an important bearing on the maintenance of peace and order in the world.
12.	On this occasion I should like to say that the final abolition of colonialism in Libya has had the happy effect of creating a new relationship between the United Kingdom of Libya and post-war Italy, a relationship based on mutual respect and fruitful cooperation within the framework of the dignity, equality, independence and sovereignty of the two countries. These two States have successfully attempted to give an example of the peaceful, beneficial and lasting relationship that can be established between the Powers of the Western world and the awakening peoples of Asia and Africa.
13.	While preserving its own traditions and spiritual values and its Islamic outlook, the United Kingdom of Libya maintains normal and correct relations with the Eastern world, and thus gives evidence of its sincere desire to proceed dispassionately and without prejudice along the way of peaceful coexistence consistent with its international ideals.
14.	With the other Arab States, Libya maintains the satisfactory and friendly relationship of a family of peoples with a common historical background of language, tradition and ideals. This relationship is dominated by a deep sense of unshakable solidarity and is inspired by a desire for close co-operation in order to achieve an economic prosperity which will raise the level of living of all Arab peoples and so contribute to the maintenance of peace and order in that part of the world.
15.	This is the spirit in which Libya is carrying on with its regional obligations as a member of the League of Arab States. Within this regional organization, Libya is co-operating with the other Arab States to strengthen their ties of friendship and understanding and to establish conditions favourable to economic development in the whole region, thus contributing to the achievement of the united aims of all Arab peoples after their final liberation from the yoke of foreign occupation.
16.	I would like to state once again in this Assembly our opinion that in view of what the League of Arab States has achieved in disseminating the ideals and principles of the United Nations within its own geographical sphere, it deserves recognition by the United Nations as a regional agency under Chapter VIII in of the Charter concerning regional arrangements, for in this Way it would be given a desired status in our Organization.
17.	The United Kingdom of Libya, which participated in the Asian-African Conference held at Bandung, Indonesia, in the spring of 1955, maintains the most friendly relations with the independent States of Africa and Asia and is assisting in the implementation of the important resolutions adopted at that historic conference and aimed primarily at the dissemination and realization of the high principles and ideals of the United Nations. The solidarity of the peoples of Asia and Africa, which is based on their desire to work together for the achievement of their lawful aspirations and their moral and material welfare, is now growing and developing in the service of world peace and cooperation in harmony with the principles and purposes of our Charter. As art African State, Libya spares no effort to strengthen its fraternal relations with the other independent African States, and these relations are being developed in the most complete harmony and understanding.
18.	The efforts jointly made by the independent African States since their historic meeting at the Accra Conference in Ghana at the beginning of 1958 are being steadily renewed and strengthened in the service of African solidarity, the basic purpose of which is to give effect, throughout the continent, to the principles of self-determination, liberty and national independence and, at the same time, to bring about the moral and material welfare of the African peoples in conformity with the principles of the United Nations.
19.	I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the King of Libya, his people and his Government, to salute all the African nations struggling for dignity and liberation and to welcome in advance to membership in this world Organization those African States on the threshold of independence, namely, Somalia, Nigeria, Togoland and the Cameroons. Against this, background, the Libyan delegation will follow the debate on questions before the current session relating to the Non-Self-Governing Territories with keen interest and special attention. It is its hope that the General Assembly will resolve them in accordance with the ideals of the United Nations and the principles of international trusteeship.
20.	In the belief that the hateful practices of racial discrimination and segregation seriously jeopardize human values and are one of the major causes of friction and unrest in Africa and throughout the world, the Libyan delegation will continue to defend the principles of human dignity and equality, irrespective of race or colour. It will do so in the very sincere hope that man will ultimately be emancipated in law as well as in custom and tradition.
21.	The Libyan delegation has been highly gratified to note that the General Assembly resolution adopted unanimously at its Third Emergency Special Session in August 1958 and relating to what was then called the "Middle East crisis" [resolution 1237 (ES-III)] is being carried out in a most re: during manner. The relations between the parties concerned have finally returned to normal and now naturally reflect the lasting friendliness and brotherly feelings which are the very corner-stone of the family of Arab States. The bitter allusions made a few days ago from this rostrum by the representatives of Zionist aggression will merely have the effect of closing our ranks and strengthening our determination to exercise our right of self-defence against expansionist forces and subversive intrigues.
22.	Moreover, the Libyan delegation regards the manner in which the United Arab Republic is discharging its obligations in the management of the Suez Canal as most satisfactory. Not only is it guaranteeing freedom of navigation through this important international waterway in accordance with the provisions of the 1888 Constantinople Convention, but it is bringing to that task a care and diligence hitherto unknown. What is more, work is under way along the entire length of this waterway to make shipping safer and to permit the passage of deep-draught vessels. I would add that the United Arab Republic has the full support of Libya for the policy it is following in effectively and reliably managing the Suez Canal is in conformity with international rules and historical precedent.
23.	The United Kingdom of Libya has welcomed with the greatest satisfaction the happy solution of the Cyprus question, which was given special attention by the United Nations at the last few sessions of the General Assembly. We are happy that one of the causes of tension in the Eastern Mediterranean has disappeared. In expressing our appreciation for the wisdom and vision exercised by the parties concerned in resolving this thorny problem, I should like, on behalf of my country, to congratulate most warmly the gallant people of Cyprus for their courageous and tenacious struggle to win acceptance for their right to self- determination and independence. In saluting the Republic of Cyprus, the Libyan delegation should like to extend its best wishes that it will soon become a Member of the United Nations. The United Nations is also entitled to take credit for making a substantial and constructive solution to the successful settlement of this problem. May this success encourage us to intensify our aid to the parties concerned in another delicate question — this time in the Western Mediterranean — with a view to the achievement of a peaceful settlement.
24.	This brings me to the tragic Algerian question. It is very sad to note that for over five years an agonizing war has been raging in Algeria. Not only is this disastrous war inflicting a whole series of unspeakable misfortunes and sufferings upon the peaceful population of the country, but it is also seriously jeopardizing peace in that part of the world and hampering the normal development of the neighbouring countries by disturbing their security and tranquillity.
25.	The just struggle of the Algerian people to defend their legitimate rights to human dignity, self-determination and independence has been most sympathetically regarded in all parts of the world and in France itself. Meanwhile, at the last few sessions of the General Assembly, sincere efforts have been made to help France and the representatives of the Algerian rebellion to reach a peaceful settlement to end the bloodshed. Patient and repeated efforts have been made to convince France of the pointlessness of continuing a terrible war against a people determined to live in dignity and to exercise its universally recognized right to national independence and territorial integrity.
26.	While deploring the war being waged by France in Algeria and the atrocities committed against the peaceful population, particularly the Algerians assembled in regroupment centres, the Libyan delegation considers that there have been certain developments which warrant special attention inasmuch as they might provide the basis for a just and peaceful solution.
27.	The first event of importance was the establishment of the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic last year. The United Kingdom of Libya has recognized that Government for two basic reasons. First because it reflects the true will of the Algerian people in their legitimate aspirations to self-determination and independence and, as the outgrowth of national groups in rebellion against French rule in Algeria, it has actual control over vast areas of Algerian territory in which it exercises all the attributes of sovereignty.
28.	The second reason is that Libya, in the belief that the enlightened self-interest of the French people lies in the sound and realistic application of the principle of self-determination and independence to Algeria, regards the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic, for purposes of a peaceful solution of the Algerian question, as the valid spokesman with whom France can enter into the necessary negotiations. These negotiations would be directed towards creating the conditions for a restoration of peace, the first step towards a solution which would serve the interests of the two parties and initiate an era of peace and co-operation throughout the area.
29.	The second event of importance is the deep impact on France of the continuation of the Algerian war, which led to the establishment of the Fifth Republic and the coming to power of General de Gaulle.
30.	When that happened, the whole world was filled with hope that a stable Government would finally be established in France with the courage and authority to recognize, as an essential factor in France’s recovery, the reality of an independent Algeria, thus putting an end to a futile war and inaugurating a new relationship between the two countries that would be characterized by friendship and co-operation based on the sovereign equality of two States, one French and one Algerian. Those expectations were all the more warranted as the new Head of Government was a man who had won prominence in his country and throughout the world by his heroic stand against the occupation of his country by foreign troops, by forming a Government in exile — a provisional Government in fact — which, despite the charge that it was not representative, helped to bring about the liberation of France and the restoration of its independence and sovereignty.
31.	While the world waited for a realistic and generous gesture from General de Gaulle towards a peaceful solution of the Algerian question, there was no respite in the atrocious war. On the contrary, both sides had intensified their efforts with the result that its calamities, sufferings and atrocities reached indescribable proportions and outraged the conscience of mankind.
32.	On 16 September 1959, in a statement delivered with the greatest solemnity, General de Gaulle finally revealed France’s proposals for a settlement of the Algerian question. I shall briefly analyse and discuss those proposals. I shall do so dispassionately and with the sole objective of making a calm and constructive contribution to this debate. General de Gaulle said: "Bearing in mind all the factors — Algerian, national and international — I deem it necessary that this recourse to self-determination be here and now proclaimed."
33.	The Libyan delegation noted with gratification the recognition by France of the principle of self-determination for which the gallant Algerian people have patiently and courageously fought. This represents a starting point, the goal towards which the General Assembly has directed its efforts in recent sessions. General de Gaulle then stated: "In the name of France and of the Republic, in virtue of the power vested in me by the Constitution to consult the citizens, if God grants me life and the people heed my words, I give my undertaking to ask the Algerians, in their twelve departments, what they want ultimately to be, and to ask all Frenchmen to endorse whatever choice they make."
34.	The Libyan delegation questions the real value of self-determination by the Algerians if it is to be subject to the approval of all Frenchmen. What would happen if the French did not endorse the Algerian choice? In order to preserve the basic value of the principle of self-determination and to avert legal chaos, the Libyan delegation considers that self- determination for the Algerians should be the free and final choice of the Algerians and of the Algerians alone.
35.	In his comments on the three possible solutions on which the Algerians are to be consulted, namely, secession from the French Community, integration with France or autonomy, General de Gaulle described secession in the following terms: "Or else, secession, in which some expect to find independence. This would mean that France would abandon the Algerians who had expressed the desire to break away. They would then, without France, organize the territory in which they live, marshal their potential resources and establish the Government of their choice. I am personally convinced that the result would be improbable and disastrous. Algeria being currently what it is, and the world what we know it to be, secession would bring in its wake appalling poverty, shocking political chaos, mass slaughter and, before long, the belligerent dictatorship of the Communists."
36.	The Libyan delegation believes that any choice made as the result of a free consultation of the people should be respected as such. Moreover, how can it be predicted that the Algerians are not likely to choose secession or independence in so important a consultation, to be held by individual and secret ballot? Nor is it clear why the choice of secession should be disastrous. The least that may be said of an attitude which appears so prejudicial and impassioned is that it is imperative, not only to guarantee free expression by the Algerians but also to protect France against the temptations of its prejudices, that the consultation should be surrounded with all the necessary safeguards.
37.	The United Nations can and must offer its assistance and assume responsibility for conducting and supervising the consultation of the Algerians on their final choice. Besides, only by a consultation held under 3uch international safeguards can the validity of the predictions that the Algerians are unlikely to opt for independence be put to the test.
38.	May I take the liberty of observing most respectfully that the gloomy and disheartening picture of the future of an independent Algeria painted by the President of the French Republic does not reflect the anticipated results of what is commonly called the "civilizing mission" which France has been carrying out in Algeria for over a century.
39.	The Libyan delegation would further point out that the arguments warning against mass slaughter and Communist dictatorship have been invoked time and again with regard to the other countries of North Africa and all the newly-emancipated countries where order and stability prevail and where the handful of Communists lament their isolation and weakness and bitterly envy the power and wide public of their Western European masters and comrades.
40.	After asserting that the question would be put to the Algerians as individuals, General de Gaulle declared: "It goes without saying that, if such should be the case, those Algerians, regardless of origin, who wanted to remain French would do so whatever happened, and France would arrange, if necessary, for their regrouping and resettlement."
41.	The Libyan delegation would like to point out that, in principle, the outcome of any consultation of the people should be determined by the choice of the majority of the people being consulted. In any event, the intention of France to arrange for a regrouping and resettlement of those who wanted to remain French is expressed in ambiguous terms. Are they, for example, to be regrouped and resettled in metropolitan France? However complicated a process that might be, it would perhaps be motivated by a desire to offset the depopulation of France and to contribute to its economic recovery. Or are they to be regrouped and resettled in a particular area of independent Algeria? In that case such plans should be discussed between the French Government and the Government of an independent Algeria. In this connexion, I would recall that the Provisional Government of Algeria has consistently stated its intention to respect the fundamental rights and legitimate interests of the various minority groups in Algeria. Or else — and let us speak frankly —  is it proposed to partition the country and to establish a political frontier between an independent Algeria and a French Algeria? Apart from the fact that there is no shred of justification for such a move, it would have the effect not only of complicating still more dangerously the Algerian question, but of creating a situation fraught with danger to world peace and security throughout North Africa. A review of the disastrous results of partition solutions in Germany, Palestine, Korea and South-East Asia should be sufficient evidence of that fact, not to speak of other examples which have already cost mankind two outrageous wars in a single generation.
42.	I come now to a consideration of the time-limits fixed by General de Gaulle and of the conditions in which the proposed consultation is to be held. General de Gaulle said: "As for the date of the voting, I shall fix it in due course, not later than four years after peace has effectively been restored, that is, once the situation is such that no more than 200 persons have been killed in ambushes and attacks within a year."
43.	The Libyan delegation considers that not only is the period of four years after the effective restoration of peace- very long in itself, but that also the whole concept is vague and in fact evaluated in terms of war. We believe that the real restoration of peace, as far as the Algerian question is concerned, means a situation in which the two opposing parties agree on a cease-fire and come to an understanding on the conditions and safeguards for the implementation of the principle of self-determination.
44.	The third important event which will, we hope, facilitate the longed-for ending of the Algerian tragedy took place only a few days ago. On 28 September, the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic made its position known. In a solemn declaration, the Provisional Algerian Government took note of the recognition by the President of the French Republic of the right of Algeria to self-determination. After reaffirming the national existence and sociological unity of the Algerian people, and the territorial integrity of Algeria, the Provisional Algerian Government declared that the independence which would arise out of the free and final choice of the Algerian people would safeguard individual liberties and guarantee personal security, and that the wealth of the Sahara would encourage wide and fruitful co-operation, in the general interest.
45.	After listing the problems calling for discussion, the Provisional Algerian Government, which directs and controls the fight of the Algerian people, asserted that there could be immediate peace and that to that end — and I quote — "the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic was ready to enter into conversations with the French Government concerning the conditions... and the safeguards for the application of self-determination".
46.	In view of this offer of peace, and the willingness of the Provisional Algerian Government to discuss these conditions and safeguards, it is difficult to find any justification for the French representative’6 statement at this rostrum, that "the rebels seek to impose secession by force" [814th meeting, para. 111].
47.	Nearly all the conditions now seem to be present for a speedy and peaceful solution of the Algerian tragedy. No effort should be spared to persuade France to listen to the voice of reason and to make it possible, by accepting the Provisional Algerian Government's offer, to halt the bloodshed and give the Algerian people an opportunity of deciding their own future as rapidly as possible,
48.	The birth of an independent State of Algeria would, we are sure, open the way to an era of peace and fruitful co-operation. This is a unique opportunity for General de Gaulle to contribute to the real glory and grandeur of France and its resurgence in an era of peace full of promise. It is to be hoped that this appeal will encourage wisdom and far-sightedness.
49.	One of the most important causes of tension and instability in the Near East is the tragedy of the more than one million Palestinian Arabs, both Christian and Moslem, whose terrible fate it has been to be cast overnight into the blackest poverty and the most overwhelming privation. More than ten years ago, the Palestine refugees were driven from their homes and fields and their ancestral land after the frightful aggression committed against their country during those tragic events in Palestine which constitute the worst crime ever perpetrated in the history of mankind against the sacred right of private property, the sanctity of the fatherland and the elementary right of human groups to protection against mass expulsion through brigandage and terror.
50.	Until a just and equitable solution is found for the Palestine question as a whole, it is the duty of the United Nations because of its responsibility in the matter, to continue moral and material assistance to the Palestine refugees through the appropriate United Nations agency. It is of the utmost importance that this United Nations assistance should continue by means of UNWRA. In this connexion, the Libyan delegation supports the Secretary-General's proposals [A/4121] regarding the need to continue UNWRA and the services it performs, in accordance with United Nations responsibilities in this field. The Libyan delegation believes that any solution envisaging the resettlement of the Palestine refugees must be looked for in the implementation of the General Assembly's resolutions relating to the return of the refugees to their country of origin, to their own homes and the fields plundered by the invaders.
51.	The people and Government of Libya, being increasingly anxious at the race towards armaments of every kind, are following with the closest attention and the most fervent hopes the efforts now being made under United Nations auspices to find the long-sought answers to the disarmament problem. The technical talks on the control of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons tests give grounds for hoping that the Powers concerned may at last reach a satisfactory agreement. The Libyan delegation trusts that the suspension, followed by the prohibition, of nuclear weapons will ultimately give all mankind reason to hope that atomic energy will be utilized for exclusively peaceful purposes.
52.	One very important item on our agenda is the question of nuclear tests in the Sahara [agenda item 68]. In this connexion, the Libyan delegation shares the grave misgivings that are felt in Libya and in the countries bordering the test area, and by the people of the African Continent as a whole, at France’s intention of testing its first atomic bomb in the Sahara at a fast-approaching date. The Libyan delegation hopes that the General Assembly will examine this item as a question of urgency so that France can be made to see the gravity of its atomic plans in the Sahara and be convinced of the need to renounce them. At their recent Conference at Monrovia, the capital of Liberia, the independent African States protested vehemently on this matter and decided to appeal for United Nations help in eliminating the serious threat which now hangs over the Sahara in particular and the peoples of Africa in general.
53.	The colossal amount being spent on the armaments race could contribute effectively to the development of the world’s natural wealth and the raising of the level of living of peoples in the under-developed countries. We therefore noted with great interest the plan for complete and general disarmament laid before the General Assembly [799th meeting] by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union.
54.	The Libyan delegation also feels that man's great victories in the exploration of outer space should be pursued solely with a view to putting scientific progress at the service of mankind as a whole.
55.	The Libyan delegation is firmly convinced that it is the poverty, ignorance and disease plaguing a large part of the world’s population which breed despair and disorder throughout the world, hindering the genuine emancipation of individuals and nations and impeding the establishment of friendly relations among peoples. The Libyan delegation therefore feels compelled to pay a warm tribute to the efforts of the United Nations to wipe out these plagues which are mankind's most formidable enemies. I am happy, on this occasion, to express the Libyan people’s appreciation and gratitude for the technical assistance which Libya receives from the United Nations. The Libyan Government hopes that the projects which it has submitted to the Special Fund will receive due consideration. The United Kingdom of Libya, as it perseveres in the difficult task of placing the country's economy on a stable foundation and raising the intellectual and material standards of the population, is sure that the United Nations will continue to give support and encouragement to a State which was born under its auspices and will not fail in its responsibilities towards Libya.
56.	Libya is deeply anxious for peace, security and international co-operation based on a solid foundation. We believe, therefore, that causes of world conflict should be kept constantly under review by the United Nations.
57.	In Europe, a just, free and democratic solution of the German question would enable the German people to regain their unity and would at the same time eliminate one of the most serious causes of tension and conflict now threatening world peace.
58.	The Libyan delegation also hopes that Italy and Austria will be able to find a peaceful settlement of the problems which now seem to be dividing them and that order and friendly relations will be restored along their common frontier.
59.	The violence that is life in the Middle East, and particularly in the southern part of the Arabian peninsula, is quite incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations. A solution should be sought by peaceful means for the problems of Oman and southern Yemen, taking into account the real wishes of the inhabitants and their right to self-determination.'
60.	In Africa, the internal troubles in the Cameroons under French administration are a source of great anxiety. We have always maintained that the holding of general elections prior to independence would contribute to the tranquillity and domestic peace of this new African sister State.
61.	Lastly, in connexion with the recent developments' in South-East Asia, the Libyan delegation hopes that the Security Council's action will help to maintain peace and security in this important part of the world, particularly within the boundaries of Laos. However, events in Tibet and the excesses committed against the Tibetan people have been a serious source of anxiety to the whole world.
62.	I should like to address my sincerest congratulations and thanks, on behalf of the Libyan delegation, to the Secretary-General and his assistants in the Secretariat for their consistent and devoted efforts in the service of the United Nations. In conclusion, I should like to assure the General Assembly of the unswerving attachment of the United Kingdom of Libya to the principles and ideals of the United Nations and to wish it the greatest possible success in its work at this session.