1.	Mr. President, it was my intention to congratulate personally Mr. Belaúnde on his appointment to the high office of the President of the General Assembly. However, I should be very grateful if you would convey to him our congratulations. I am confident that, with his great knowledge and rich experience in the United Nations, he will carry out the responsibilities of his high office in a most distinguished manner.
2.	I should also like to take this opportunity to express on behalf of my delegation our profound sympathy and heartfelt condolences to the delegation of Ceylon and the Government and people of Ceylon on the untimely death of their late Prime Minister, Mr. Bandaranaike. Mr. Bandaranaike’s leadership in Ceylon and his dedication to peace and humanity are well known to us all, and his death must surely be a great loss to the people of Ceylon.
3.	My delegation also extends its deep sympathy to the Government and people of Japan on the tragic loss in lives and property they had suffered in the recent calamity of nature. We send our condolences particularly to those whose dear ones have perished in the tragedy.
4.	This is the third occasion on which the Federation of Malaya is privileged to take part in this august international gathering, and on behalf of the Government of the Federation of Malaya I would once again renew the pledge of our nation to support the United Nations and to uphold the provisions of its Charter. But on this occasion, I am privileged to reiterate our faith in the United Nations and the principles for which it stands, as the representative of a Government which has just obtained a renewed and unequivocal mandate from the people of the Federation of Malaya.
5.	We have just had a general election, an election based on the true concept of democracy in which every citizen had a right, and was free, to decide for himself or herself, the kind of government considered most desirable. The Government I represent had won seventy-four out of the 104 seats in the House of Representatives of our Parliament. This is the measure of the support and the confidence of the people which the present Government of the Federation of Malaya now enjoys.
6.	The inauguration of our first Parliament which took place only a few days ago, was a demonstration of our determination to maintain and preserve the democracy which we have nurtured and cherished since our independence. It is on the basis of our abiding faith in democracy and our determination to uphold the Charter of the United Nations that we wish to live at peace not only with ourselves, but with our neighbours, particularly those who are so close to us in the region of Asia. However, we have become increasingly aware of a certain danger which threatens not only our own freely chosen democratic way of life, but the freedom, national sovereignty and integrity of our neighbours. We have ourselves experienced this menace and have resisted it for the past eleven years. I am happy to say that the armed struggle which we have had to put up in resisting it on our own soil is almost over, with the victory in our favour, but we are continually being made the target of subversion. We continue to be the object of ugly and hostile propaganda by press and radio directed at us from outside. We observe the same thing happening, on the same pattern, to our neighbours — Viet-Nam and Thailand. And now we see the same monstrous menace dooming in Laos.
7.	My delegation feels that it is incumbent upon us to speak on Laos. Laos is an extremely friendly country. Laos is our close neighbour. We know that Laos is sparing no efforts in consolidating its position In order to create stability and prosperity for its people. All that Laos wants is peace to carry on and to be left alone. Yet what do we see in Laos but intrigues and subversion and now the position had deteriorated so much that the Secretary-General of the United Nations has been approached. We are glad that the Security Council is seized of the matter and we are definitely satisfied that the decision it took to appoint a fact finding Sub-Committee was a correct one. The maintenance of peace and security is certainly the  business of the Security Council. Had it not taken that decision it would have failed in its sacred responsibility towards mankind.
8.	The Government of the Federation of Malaya will pledge here and now that it will abide by any decision of the Security Council or the General Assembly in respect of Laos and hereby give a solemn undertaking that it would play its part within the framework of any decision of the United Nations.
9.	From our own experience, we are inclined to the view that it may not be so easy to obtain sufficient evidence of direct external intervention and involvement in the present subversive and disruptive activities in Laos. It may be desirable to have, with the consent and co-operation of the Governments concerned, continued United Nations presence in the area, in-one form or another, for some length of time, if tangible results are to be obtained.
10.	Young and small countries like ours, in our region of the world, are naturally preoccupied with the process of laying a secure and stable foundation to their newly-won independence. It is therefore very regrettable, that they should be harassed in their efforts to consolidate their national sovereignty and integrity, notwithstanding the often repeated professions of adherence, and the lip-service paid, to the so-called principles of peaceful coexistence.
11.	The events in Tibet show that colonialism is still rampant in our area of the world. While considerable progress has been achieved in the struggle against the old, traditional form of European colonialism, in Asia and Africa, we have become increasingly aware of a new and more devilish and sinister form of colonialism.
12.	The Dalai Lama's journey to seek refuge in India because of his devotion to the cause of freedom and liberty for his people in Tibet has aroused the sympathy of all freedom-loving peoples the world over. We are all aware of his desperate appeal to the United Nations.
13.	Why has there been disturbance in the peaceful life of a country like Tibet, a country where men do not ask for much, but merely the liberty to live in peace and the serenity which they have long had, preserving their right to worship as they please? Yet today those men of religion who practise and believe in peace are fighting for that peace and freedom they hold so dear.
14.	While most of the countries in Asia which had been under the domination of Western colonial rule have achieved their independence, we are witnessing a ruthless suppression of the heroic Tibetan people. But what is happening in Tibet is not new. We have seen the same pattern of suppression in Hungary and elsewhere. The Federation of Malaya, together with Ireland, have requested the inscription of the question of Tibet on the agenda of the General Assembly [A/4234]. In his speech this morning [820th meeting], the representative of Hungary alleged that the Federation of Malaya acted under the influence of the United States. I can say quite categorically here that the allegation is not only baseless and unfounded but also made in a manner which, to say the least, is deplorable and a slander on our foreign policy in regard to the question of Tibet, which is, as is quite well known, an independent policy and entirely our own. May I point out that the Federation of Malaya was one of the first countries to pronounce itself on the question of Tibet.
15.	The Government of the Federation of Malaya condemns colonialism in any form, be it in West Irian, Algeria, Hungary or Tibet. The Federation of Malaya is pledged actively to support subject peoples and nations in their legitimate aspiration to self-determination and independence.
16.	 Although the question of West Irian has not been included in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly, my delegation nevertheless feels it necessary to express the profound regrets of the Government of the Federation of Malaya that no amicable settlement of this question is yet in sight. I should like once again to reiterate that, in the view of my delegation, the question of West Irian is one of vestigial colonialism, and it is in this light that we must express our concern in this matter.
17.	One of the greatest events in the life of our young nation had been the conclusion this year of a Treaty of Friendship with Indonesia — the first of its kind entered into by the Federation of Malaya — reflecting our desire to restore those ties of race and culture with Indonesia: ties which were interrupted by the accidents of history.
18.	The Federation of Malaya has once again, together with other Asian and African Members, proposed the inscription of the question of Algeria in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly [A/4140]. We uphold the principle of non-intervention in matters which are strictly within the domestic jurisdiction of any State. However, we firmly believe that any problem which may result in international tension and constitute a threat to international peace and security is a proper matter for consideration by the General Assembly of the United Nations. In our considered view, the question of Algeria is not a matter which is essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of France alone. The whole free world has an interest in it. All freedom-loving nations and peoples have a stake in it. The war of independence in Algeria still goes on. The Federation of Malaya Is determined to make every endeavour to exert whatever little influence it has, here in the United Nations or in any other international forum, to assist in removing the causes of strife and injustice in that area and assist the parties concerned in arriving at an acceptable, amicable and just solution.
19.	My delegation is studying very closely the recent statement of the President of France on the question of Algeria. We feel that this is a very important statement in keeping with the stature of President de Gaulle and his dedication to the task of enhancing the prestige, dignity and international status of France. His recent declaration, therefore, merits very careful consideration,
20.	However, because each colonial Power has a different meaning for the same word in the colonial vocabulary — as we well know from our own experience as a colonial appendage of the United Kingdom before we became independent — we have not as yet been able to interpret the details of the statement by the President of France. We earnestly hope that the French delegation will participate actively in the consideration of the question of Algeria during this session of the General Assembly and thus assist the General Assembly to arrive at a correct decision based on a proper understanding of the latest situation resulting from this very important statement by the President of France.
21.	My delegation has been greatly impressed by one particular part of the statement made by the President of France on the question of Algeria, when he said — and I quote: "Taking into account all these factors — those of the Algerian situation, those inherent in the national and the international situation — I deem it necessary that recourse to self-determination be here and now proclaimed." We hope and pray that this wise declaration could form the basis for negotiations between all the parties concerned for the achievement of a peaceful solution in Algeria.
22.	Because of our ardent desire to uphold the prestige and dignity of the United Nations, my delegation must once again express our grave concern over the continued defiance of the resolutions of the General Assembly of the United Nations on the question of Hungary by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Hungarian authorities and their continued refusal to co-operate with bodies set up and persons appointed by the General Assembly.
23.	The question of Cyprus, which had been on the agenda of the General Assembly for so many sessions, is, now happily no longer before us. My delegation would like to take this opportunity to place on record the profound appreciation and admiration of the Government of the Federation of Malaya for the statesmanship of all the parties concerned in working out a peaceful and just solution of the Cyprus question. We should like in particular to pay tribute to the leaders oi the Greek Cypriot community, as well as the Turkish Cypriot community, and we should also like to take this opportunity to extend to the people of Cyprus the best wishes of the Government and people of the Federation of Malaya for their future as an independent Republic. We look forward to welcoming the independent Republic of Cyprus to the great family of nations in this world Organization.
24.	It is also with great enthusiasm and pleasure that the Federation of Malaya anticipates the forthcoming independence of the new African States of the Cameroons, Togoland, Nigeria and Somalia next year. We eagerly look forward to welcoming them to their rightful places in our international community of free nations. My delegation hopes that the path blazed by Ghana and Guinea in the last few years, which will be taken by these four new African nations next year, in the onward rapid and steady march of the peoples of the great continent of Africa to independence, will be taken by all countries in Africa before long. We earnestly hope that, through the. co-operation of the metropolitan Powers and the peoples of the dependent territories in Africa, political, economic and social progress will be accelerated, so as to make it possible for firm dates for independence to be fixed for all the countries of Africa which are still under colonial rule.
25.	It was with much regret that the Federation of Malaya once again co-sponsored the request for the inscription on the agenda of this session of the General Assembly [A/4147 and Add.1] of the question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies of "apartheid" of the Government of the Union of South Africa. My delegation sincerely hopes that the Government of the Union of South Africa will not continue to ignore the appeal which has been made year after year since 1952 by the General Assembly of the United Nations, calling upon it to do away with. its policy of "apartheid". It is hoped that the moral force of the United Nations will bring about a change of heart towards a more enlightened policy consistent with fundamental human rights and human dignity on the part of the South African Government. Such a change will remove the only blot in an otherwise happy relationship now existing between the Federation of, Malaya and the Union of South Africa in the family of the Commonwealth of nations.
26.	The Government and people of the Federation of Malaya have followed with great interest and expectation the efforts made by the great Powers towards the relaxation of existing international tension. Though the results of the meetings of the Foreign Ministers in Geneva have not been as encouraging as we had hoped for, nevertheless, we join all peace-loving people the world over in optimistically hoping that some concrete agreement will ultimately emerge from their deliberations. We particularly welcome the meeting between Mr. Eisenhower and Mr. Khrushchev, and their exchange of visits, as a contribution towards the relaxation of existing international tensions.
27.	It is our constant hope that the main question in Europe, the unification of Germany, will be resolved in the near future.
28.	We are extremely anxious that the question of disarmament should be settled once and for all. However, we feel that the initiative still lies with the nuclear Powers. We have to make it absolutely clear that any programme for reduction of armaments is possible only when simultaneously carried out and consistent with the security of every nation. We feel that disarmament is the fruit of an effective system of international security, co-operation and understanding rather than its basis.
29.	While all the three nuclear Powers have mutually suspended tests temporarily, it is a matter of great concern to my delegation that France should be contemplating testing its first nuclear bomb in the Sahara. We hope that France will reconsider this decision and be responsive to world public opinion.
30.	Because nationalism is so much a part of our life in the Federation of Malaya, we recognize nationalism wherever ii exists. We are in full sympathy with the nationalistic aspirations of the people of the Middle East. Peaceful settlements by the Arabs themselves of their own political problems is a matter to be encouraged, and any foreign intervention or interference cannot be tolerated. My delegation believes also that any external assistance towards the solution of economic problems in this area must be given in order to sustain and reinforce nationalism but never to supplant it. It would be deplorable if economic aid or co-operation in this area becomes only a means of transforming the Arab countries into pawns in the diabolical game of power politics.
31.	The upsurge of genuine nationalism everywhere must be recognized. For example, nationalism in the Federation of Malaya is a force which is far from being restrictive, it has wisely governed the political thinking of the leaders of our country and has amply proved, its usefulness in creating a new outlook in a country which was once under the domination of a Western Power. We have been able to adopt what is best in the world. In the field of industrial development, we have adopted the capitalistic practice of allowing private enterprise to find its fullest expression. In the sphere of community development and social services, we have adopted a programme patterned on the basis of socialistic ideals. Nationalism has channelled the energies of the people of the Federation of Malaya to create and improve schools, clinics, hospitals, co-operative movements, housing and land development schemes, labour benefits and all the social services intended to enrich the life of the people. During the two years of its independence, the Federation of Malaya has made much progress in the field of basic economic development as well as in community projects. In the private sector, there has also been a great deal of expansion in industrial as well as business and commercial enterprises.
32.	It cannot be denied that there exist today nations which have reached different stages in their social and economic development. Some are highly developed while others are under-developed, and there are those which are undeveloped. International peace and security cannot be maintained for long if economic instability and injustice prevail in some countries or if there continues to exist a gap in the standard of living between the peoples of different countries.
33.	The Federation of Malaya has benefited much from the various international agencies and bilateral arrangements with other nations in the field of economic development. We are glad to have been able to participate in the various spheres of economic cooperation in order to close the economic gap both within our borders and between nations,
34.	We have also learned through our experience that direct economic aid alone would not solve the problem of economic instability or backwardness. What is equally important is guidance in capital accumulation and increase in productivity. It is not enough for Governments only to co-operate with each other. The private sector of those nations that are prepared to share their know-how and make capital investments towards creating economic strength in those underdeveloped and undeveloped areas should be given every encouragement to do so. For that reason, the Government of the Federation of Malaya takes every possible measure to encourage foreign private investments. Not only are we prepared to allow remittance of profits on capital invested from overseas but we also allow repatriation of invested capital of approved projects to the country whence it came even if it is outside the sterling area. There are no restrictions on ownership and no discrimination against foreign enterprise. There are tariff concessions and income tax relief and special treatment is given to pioneer industries. Every assurance is given towards the security of foreign investments. Hence the Federation of Malaya has entered into an investment guarantee programme with the United States and is prepared to examine similar proposals with any friendly investor country.
35.	There is a real and urgent need for international co-operation in the economic and social fields in order to reduce the existing gap in the standard of living between nations. Any development programme aimed at improving the economic and social standards in one country must also take into consideration the progress and conditions existing in neighbouring countries. It is perhaps no longer possible for one nation to achieve economic and social progress in complete isolation from other countries. There is growing realization of the necessity for neighbouring countries to get together and plan together, sharing ideas and exchanging knowledge and skills to achieve the maximum results in their common endeavour.
36.	It is not necessary that all nations in any given region should be like-minded on political matters for such active co-operation to be successful. We maintain that it is possible for countries in a given region to co-operate on economic, social, and cultural matters, especially when they have so much in common, without necessarily creating another political grouping. Of course, much can be said for a regional forum where political ideas could be exchanged for the purpose of creating better understanding among neighbours within the area. In conformity with this view, our Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, during his visit to the Philippines in. January of this year, called for the establishment of closer co-operation among the countries of South-East Asia especially in the economic, social and educational fields.
37.	In considering the question of closer economic, social and cultural association among the countries of South-East Asia, the Federation of Malaya has not been motivated by any desire to create a new military alliance, or to assist in the establishment of a wing of any existing military alliance, in our part of the world. It is our intention that there should be no political strings attached to the proposed association, which would be free of any discolouration to satisfy a particular power bloc.
38.	As a small country, we place our faith in the United Nations. We believe that the United Nations is the one Organization which can bring peace, security and prosperity to mankind. It is in the moral force exerted by the United Nations rather than in military strength that we can place our hopes for peace and security even in South-East Asia. Any regional association and co-operation in our area of the world can only be in furtherance of the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations.
39.	Under its Charter, the United Nations is pledged to resist aggressive force. It is a cardinal purpose of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security, and, to that end, the United Nations must take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace. Though a comparatively small country with limited resources, the Federation of Malaya will play its full part in, and make its proper contribution to, the noble efforts of the United Nations for the achievement of peace and justice for all mankind.