144.	Mr. President, allow me, first of all, to join the speakers who have preceded me on this rostrum in congratulating you on your unanimous election to the high office of President of the General Assembly at its fourteenth session.
145.	We all welcome the establishment of direct personal contacts between the responsible leaders of the United States of America and the Soviet Union. It is my understanding that one of the main purposes of the current conversations is to review the major outstanding problem with a view to establishing areas of possible agreement where both parties desire and find it worth-while to make a fresh attempt at working out solutions.
146.	In all countries, ordinary men and women are anxiously and eagerly longing for an improvement in the general international atmosphere. For too long we have had to live in much too cold a climate.
147.	No doubt it is only prudent that we be not governed in our policies by hopes for overnight, and spectacular settlements of major outstanding issues. The possibilities for a gradual improvement do however, in our view, appear better now than in the last few years and make us in Norway feel there is justification for cautious optimism. It is our hope that we have now definitely embarked upon a period of continuous contacts and negotiations at different levels. We assume that before decisions are taken all parties directly concerned in the problems taken up for solution will have their full say.
148.	If we are justified in our hopes, it is to be expected that this period of negotiation will prove to be of considerable length and will require both patience and frankness as well as a real will to accept solutions on the basis of equitable give and take. Time will be required in order to reach a mutual understanding of respective positions and, on that basis, explore and work out feasible compromises.
149.	As the representative of a small country, I must however emphasize that any compromise eventually agreed upon must meet one crucial test: it must not infringe on the rightful desires of the peoples concerned. Thus, any possible arrangement relating to Central Europe must fully respect and safeguard the freely expressed desire of the inhabitants of West Berlin to continue to live in a free democracy.
150.	Bilateral contacts, or discussions and negotiations directly between the parties concerned, should of course not be viewed as a substitute for the use of the universal instrument of the United Nations, for utilizing the capabilities which have been developed and are continuously growing within this Organization. On the other hand, I also want to associate myself with the Secretary-General's statement in the introduction to his annual report, to the effect that: "... the United Nations is not intended to be a substitute for normal procedures of reconciliation and mediation but rather an added instrument providing, within the limits of its competence, a further or ultimate support for the maintenance of peace and security." [A/4132/Add. l, p. 1.]
151.	Over the last few years the United Nations has proved to be indispensable in a variety of situations which threatened to get out of hand and which, without the assistance of the United Nations, might well have grown into catastrophes. This use and serious testing of the United Nations has also brought out the remarkable viability of the Organization and its ability to adapt its procedures and actions to prevailing needs and rapidly changing circumstances. On behalf of the Norwegian Government, I therefore urge that in any negotiations to come, the parties directly concerned make full use of the possibilities offered by the United Nations.
152.	There is in our day a marked tendency towards universality in international affairs, which is clearly determined by technical and economic developments. In questions of peace and war, there are no longer parties concerned and others not concerned. Over the last couple of years economic trends and developments in the industrialized countries have had immediate and serious effects in the raw material producing and agricultural areas of the world. Lately there is also a growing realization of the impact of trends in the less developed countries upon the more advanced and diversified economies.
153.	I would like to stress the importance to the world community as a whole of an ever more active participation of all Members, old and new, in the solution of our common problems.
154.	Valuable results have been achieved, not least in the past year. I need only mention the questions of Lebanon and Jordan and the problem of Cyprus, which have been wholly or partly solved. Caution and moderation on the part of the Member States seem to me to have been essential, even decisive factors, in their solution.
155.	Allow me to dwell for a moment on the role played by the United Nations in the question of Cyprus. During the years when this issue was before the Organization, none of the parties succeeded in getting the support of the United Nations for any of the more extreme positions. I have no doubt that this attitude on the part of the world Organization contributed significantly to making the parties realize that moderation and a compromise based on a system of balance and counterbalance was the only way out of the tragic situation which had arisen. The interrelationship between assistance by the United Nations and direct consultations and negotiations which was so successfully applied in the case of Cyprus, to us stands out as an example of wise application of the relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter.
156.	It is the sincere hope of the Norwegian Government that a development along similar lines may take place in the question of Algeria, where close to ten million human beings continue to suffer under large-scale military operations, and where many hundreds of lives are lost every month. As far as the United Nations is concerned, this will require active assistance from all Members and a willingness to refrain from soliciting the support of the Organization for extreme positions. The adoption by Member States, without exception, and by our Organization of such a course of moderation would in my view be the adequate response in the new and more hopeful situation created by the declaration of President de Gaulle, opening the door for a development towards solutions in accordance with the desires of the population of Algeria.
157.	When the Assembly discussed the first reports of the General Committee [A/4214] early this week, my delegation voted in accordance with the well-known view of the Norwegian Government on the representation of China in the United Nations. There is no need for me to elaborate that view in any detail. I would, however, like to stress two of the considerations underlying our position as they have a direct bearing on recent events in Asia.
158.	Firstly, to us the question of the recognition or non-recognition of a foreign Government is essentially a practical problem. If a Government exercises full and effective control over a national territory it should in our view be recognized under international law. Our recognition of a foreign Government has never carried with it any moral approval of its actions.
159.	Secondly, the non-recognition of the People's Republic of China as a Member State means that its Government may justifiably claim that it is not bound by the obligations set forth in the United Nations Charter. What the international community might gain by admitting the People's Republic of China is too often ignored when the representation issue is being discussed.
160.	As a Member of the United Nations, the People's Republic of China would not only be pledged to observe the Charter provisions concerning the peaceful settlement of disputes. It would also, by the presence of its representatives hers, be actively engaged in the negotiating machinery which constitutes the practical expression of the Charter provisions for peaceful settlement. In the present situation, the Chinese People's Republic is outside the existing international order and beyond its control.
161.	The reports of the repressive actions perpetrated by the Government of the People's Republic of China against the population of Tibet have caused deep grief among the people of Norway. These actions constitute serious violations of the principles which are now widely accepted as a code of behaviour within the international Community.
162.	As for the situation in Laos, the Norwegian delegation will await the report of the sub-committee of the Security Council before taking any position regarding the further handling of this question. We do hope that the material to be submitted by the subcommittee will confirm other reports that the latest developments have alleviated the most immediate anxiety of the Laotian Government.
163.	Turning now to disarmament, the Norwegian delegation notes with satisfaction the agreement between France, the USSR, the United Kingdom and the United States to set up a ten-nation Disarmament Committee. The unanimous desire among the great Powers to resume direct discussions and their agreement on the composition of the group for such discussions we take as a good omen for forthcoming progress in this truly vital question.
164.	I feel it my duty, however, to state that the Norwegian delegation is anxious that the United Nations should as soon as possible again assume an active role in the field of disarmament. My delegation therefore welcomes the declared intention of the countries concerned to keep the United Nations Disarmament Commission appropriately informed of their progress, and hopes that these reports will provide a useful basis for the work of that Commission in the field of general disarmament, for which the United Nations carries the ultimate responsibility.
165.	One of the most promising developments during the last year is the progress made by the three Powers negotiating in Geneva on the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests under effective control. A considerable degree of agreement has already been reached, and my delegation believes that a final test ban agreement under effective control will contribute significantly to creating the improved climate required for further effective steps to be taken on the road to internationally controlled disarmament. We are therefore glad that these negotiations will soon be resumed, and we hope that the parties concerned will bend their efforts toward bringing them to a successful conclusion.
166.	The Norwegian delegation also welcomes the decision by the atomic Powers to suspend their tests for a further period and sincerely hopes that no more tests will be conducted.
167.	The fact that the Powers chiefly concerned during the last year have discussed separately various elements of the very complex problem of disarmament is a promising development. A pragmatic, down-to-earth approach to the problems, starting with discussion of the technical aspects in particular, is, we believe, the method best suited to achieve in the end over-all and complete disarmament.
168.	Progress must be made by stages under satisfactory control. The present level of defence expenditures represents a heavy burden of which we all want to be relieved. The hard fact seems to be, however, that probably no Government feels it can take the responsibility for starting on the road to disarmament unless it can feel assured, on the basis of an effective control system, that the security of its country is not being jeopardized. Verbal agreements without control are — as Mr. Selwyn Lloyd observed [798th meeting] —  more likely to add to insecurity than to security. The aim must be to move forward by balanced stages towards the abolition of all nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction and towards the reduction of other weapons and armed forces to levels which will rule out the possibility of aggressive war.
169.	The declared desire of the Soviet Union that this Organization should adopt a course rapidly leading towards total disarmament has been noted with great interest by my delegation. The USSR proposal put forward by Mr. Khrushchev [799th meeting] deserves very close study. It is the hope of the Norwegian delegation that it will be seriously considered by the ten- nation committee, along with the detailed time-phased plan for general disarmament under adequate and effective control which was presented by the United Kingdom delegation [798th meeting].
170.	Before leaving the subject of disarmament, I would like to state that the Norwegian Government would give sympathetic consideration to proposals to devote a share of the savings resulting from internationally agreed disarmament to economic assistance to the less developed areas of the world.
171.	In the Middle East, the United Nations Emergency Force has successfully continued to contribute to the maintenance of peace and quiet along the entire borderline between Israel and Egypt, from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
172.	To secure peace and stability in this area is a task of the greatest importance, and the cost of operating the Force is indeed small compared to what is at stake and the far-reaching consequences which a renewed outbreak of hostilities in the area might have. It is therefore a matter of serious concern to my delegation that the continued operation of the Force at its present minimum strength is being jeopardized because of financial difficulties.
173.	As one of the leading maritime nations, Norway firmly believes in, and has a vital interest in upholding the principle of free navigation in international waterways. We therefore view with concern the fact that this important principle in some instances does not seem to be applied to the passage of ships and cargoes through the Suez Canal. It is our conviction that the traffic through this international water-way, which is so important for world trade, should be free and unhindered for ships and cargoes of all nationalities.
174.	A problem of great importance for the achievement of peaceful and stable conditions in the Middle East Is the reintegration and resettlement of the Palestine Arab refugees. This problem is now more than ten years old, but is unfortunately no nearer to its solution. My delegation feels that determined efforts should now be directed towards solving this problem, in accordance with earlier General Assembly resolutions and taking into account the preferences of the refugees themselves. I sincerely hope that both Israel and the Arab host countries will co-operate to this end.
175.	The Norwegian delegation shares the view of the Secretary-General [A/4121] that the assistance to the refugees by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East must be continued, pending the reintegration of the refugees into the economic life of the area. However, as the Secretary-General also points out, this reintegration is only possible within the context of general economic development. Economic and technical assistance to the host countries therefore should be among the first steps toward the solution of the refugee problem.
176.	Another step which ought to be taken promptly is the payment of just compensation for property belonging to the refugees which has been taken over by Israel. This would undoubtedly serve to alleviate much of the bitterness felt by the refugees and would facilitate progress towards reintegration and an ultimate political settlement of the differences. It may well be that some kind of partly international financing would have to be contemplated in order to assist Israel in meeting her outstanding obligations in this field.
177.	The question of the establishment of internationally agreed norms for the extent of territorial waters and for fisheries limits is of particular concern to Norway. At the thirteenth session of the General Assembly it was decided [resolution 1307 (XQI)] to convoke a second international conference on the law of the sea in Geneva in the spring of 1960.' It is our earnest hope that it will prove possible during this conference to reach agreement on the basis of the Canadian proposal for a maximum of six miles for territorial waters and twelve miles for fisheries limits, and that on this basis a solution may be found to the unfortunate disagreement which has arisen with regard to fishing rights in the waters around Iceland. We also hope that in the period until the conference takes place further incidents in these waters will be avoided.
178.	While in the economic sphere we have not recovered completely from the recession that was the centre of our attention last year, there are sufficient signs in the present world economic situation to justify a hopeful view with regard to short-term prospects. This should not, however, close our eyes to the fact that many major problems still remain to be solved, as for instance the problems relating to economic growth on the one hand, and price stability on the other. I would like to stress that in my country, and even more so in countries with an urgent and pressing need for economic development, the objective of rapid and continuous economic growth remains the overriding concern.
179.	Highly industrial countries may feel the need to make adjustments in their economies to achieve price stability as a basis for further growth. We should, however, all bear in mind that the various national economies of the world are so interlocked that measures taken in one country are bound to affect the situation in the world at large. The World Economic Survey, 1958, clearly reveals the unfavourable repercussions which recent economic set-backs in industrialized countries had on primary producing countries in particular and on world trade in general. Until ways and means have been found to reinforce the foreign exchange position of primary producing countries in times of deteriorating terms of trade, or until a scheme for the stabilization of commodity prices has been established, the industrialized nations should, as we see it, as far as possible avoid any major reduction in their economic activity. In our opinion the Secretary-General is therefore fully justified in putting special emphasis on these problems.
180.	My Government has also noted with interest that the Secretary-General has suggested strengthening the role of the United Nations in respect of global economic problems through occasional meetings of ministers of economic affairs within the Economic and Social Council. May I suggest that we encourage the Secretary-General to initiate such meetings whenever the development of the world economic situation in his view calls for ministerial attention?
181.	The Norwegian Government will continue to support the United Nations projects and programmes for technical assistance and would like to see a further development of the Organization's role as an initiator, guide and co-ordinator of economic aid programmes in general. While favouring increased responsibility for the United Nations in channelling economic assistance to the under-developed countries, we do not fail to appreciate the aid programmes carried out by other multilateral organizations and through bilateral arrangements.
182.	For that reason we also welcome the proposal to establish an international development association. We are, ready to support it financially if it is generally felt that the establishment of such an institution will materially assist the financing of economic development plans in less developed countries. While retaining the planned working relationship with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the international development association should, in our view, also establish an adequate organizational relationship with the United Nations.
183.	One word in conclusion on a very prosaic, but nonetheless vitally important aspect of the present situation of our Organization. In his foreword to the budget estimates for the financial year 1960 [A/4110] the Secretary-General states that the cash position of the United Nations is a matter of deep concern.
184.	It is no pleasant reflection on the attitude of Member States to the Organization that the Secretary-General cannot meet current payrolls out of available resources because some Members have failed to pay their contributions. Each nation has been assessed according to its ability to pay and each nation has also, by voting for the assessment scale, committed itself to paying its share which, by no standard, should mean a heavy burden on its financial resources.
185.	It is my earnest hope that ways to overcome these difficulties will be found during this session of the Assembly. The willingness of Member States to carry out conscientiously obligations freely assumed remains the very foundation of our world Organization.