117.	Mr. President, your tireless efforts in the service of the ideals embodied in the Charter ever since its foundation are well known to all. For the past two years, I too have had the occasion to admire your endeavours in the cause of peace and international understanding in various organs of the United Nations. For these reasons, I am particularly pleased that you were elected to this high office as I am confident that you will accomplish your important duties in a manner that will serve the best interests of the United Nations.
118.	I also wish to pay tribute to the retiring President, Mr. Charles Malik of Lebanon. I wish to congratulate him for having conducted the work of the thirteenth session with wisdom and distinction and in a manner which has done honour to him and to his country.
119.	When we review the problems that are still pending since our last session and the new developments which have followed, we may perceive that progress has been achieved towards relative quiet in some of them in conformity with the resolutions of the Assembly and the pledges of the parties concerned. On the other hand, we are also confronted with a number of new events which are of such a nature as to undermine world peace and security as well as the principles upon which these concepts are based. This situation makes it evident that our world has unfortunately not yet fully adapted itself to the principles embodied in the Charter to ensure the peaceful conduct of international relations.
120.	Turkey is a country that aspires to base its foreign policy entirely on the principles and purposes of the Charter. This is because we believe that the ideals of humanity, and the peace and security which are necessary for their realization, can be attained only by conforming to these Principles. At the same time, with the aim of furthering the basic concepts of the Charter, which safeguard the peace and the defence of the independence of Member States under present conditions, Turkey became convinced of the necessity of applying the principles of Articles 51 and 52, and therefore, faced with the constant abuse of the right of veto as well as with the fact that a standing force of the United Nations has not yet been organized, Turkey has adhered to NATO and to CENTO. This policy of Turkey, as I have already explained, stems from our belief that peace can best be served Under present conditions by each nation's assuring its defence through its own efforts, and by uniting these efforts with those of other nations which are equally determined to maintain their independence and which have no territorial ambitions.
121.	Another reason for Turkey’s loyal support of the United Nations and of defensive arrangements established under Articles 51 and 52 of the Charter is the existence of a democratic spirit and of complete equality based on justice and equity among the Member States of the organizations concerned.
122.	I now wish to comment on certain events and developments which have taken place in various parts of the world since the thirteenth session.
123.	In the first place, I should like to express our gratification at the solution of the Cyprus question, which, up to the thirteenth session, bad caused disagreement between our country and our friends and allies, Greece and the United Kingdom. As is known, this question had constituted a severe test upon the relations between two close allies and friends, Turkey and Greece, and had preoccupied the Members of the United Nations for five years. It gives me great satisfaction to state here today that the wise and conciliatory attitudes of our common friends during the debates in the United Nations, and the desire to reach agreement and common understanding shared by the Turkish and Greek Governments and peoples as well as by the Turkish and Greek communities of Cyprus, have led us to this happy solution. The solution of the Cyprus question brought about in this manner is a gain not only for Turkey, Greece and the United Kingdom but also for all countries sincerely attached to the ideals of the United Nations.
124.	This accomplishment in the field of the friendly and peaceful solution of conflicts has paved the way for strengthening peace and security in the region concerned and has made it possible to reactivate the traditional friendship between Turkey and Greece on a sound basis of fruitful co-operation.
125.	On this occasion I consider it a pleasurable duty to express our thanks to all our common friends who contributed to the adoption of last year's decisions, which prepared the way to mutual agreement; to the Chairman of the First Committee, Mr. Urquía of El Salvador; to Mr. de la Colina of Mexico, who introduced the final resolution [resolution 1287 (XIII)]; and to Mr. Charles Malik, President of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly.
126.	I hope that we shall soon have the opportunity of greeting here the Republic of Cyprus, which is being established through the fraternal co-operation of the Greek and Turkish communities of the island.
127.	Another matter which caused us concern in 1958 was raised by the relations among the Arab States. This year we note with satisfaction that these relations are developing in the direction of anew harmony among these fraternal States. It will be recalled that during the Third Emergency Special Session of the Assembly, a resolution [resolution 1237 (ES-III)] sponsored by all the Arab Members of our Organization was unanimously adopted. That resolution reaffirmed the principles of respect for one another's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and of non-interference in one another's internal affairs. We shall always be happy to see these principles continue to prevail among the brotherly Arab States. We hope that relations among these States will always be maintained in this spirit. I should like our Arab friends to know that we do not wish to dwell at any length on this subject because we desire to see them united and to refrain from interfering in their internal affairs.
128.	Although the general situation in the Middle East does not present the critical aspects which it did last year, unfortunately it cannot be claimed that complete tranquillity has been established. We heard the statement made here some days ago by the Foreign Minister of our friend and ally, Iran [798th meeting]. Activities on the part of a foreign State aiming to exert pressure on the public opinion of a neighbouring State and to interfere in its internal affairs through propaganda campaigns have always been deplored and condemned in the light of the principles of the Charter. We should like to express the hope that these activities will be terminated in accordance with the spirit of the provisions of the resolution voted in 1958 concerning relations among the Arab States.
129.	Another question concerning the Middle Eastern area which has caused deep sorrow not only in the region but to all peace-loving States for many years is the litigation between our Arab brothers and Israel. There are many aspects of this problem. The question of the Palestine refugees is undoubtedly one of the most important of these aspects. The hope of a prompt solution of this problem corresponds to the desires of every country which is attached to the cause of peace and humanitarian principles, and the solution of all litigious questions between our Arab brothers and Israel within the framework of the principles of the Charter would cause our profound satisfaction. In this connexion I wish to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts exerted before and following the Third Emergency Special Session of 1958 toward the establishment of peace and tranquillity in the region as well as in connexion with questions affecting the Suez Canal. I hope that the endeavours of our Secretary-General will continue to bear fruitful results as they have done up to the present and that they will be conducive to results conforming to the practices of international law, thereby assuring the settlement of these divergencies.
130.	While reviewing questions affecting our Arab brothers it is impossible not to mention the question of Algeria. Turkey has always felt profound sorrow at this problem which has arisen between the Algerian  people, to whom Turkey is attached with numerous strong ties, and France, its traditional friend for many centuries, and its ally. Turkey on many occasions has expressed from this rostrum the hope that this question may find a just and peaceful solution. It is known that in the present phase a number of studies are being conducted and contacts are being sought. We have studied carefully the last statement made by the President of the French Republic. I think that it might be too early to arrive at definite conclusions on every one of the various aspects of this statement. But it is already evident that this distinguished statesman is exerting great efforts to find a solution to this problem worthy of the humanitarian and liberal tradition of France. This is made clear from the fact that the statement in question includes the principle of self-determination and the possibilities of independence which might evolve from that principle. I think that it would be appropriate for the Members of the United Nations and the interested parties to take these considerations into account.
131.	In the vast area of Asia and Africa the cause of freedom and self-determination has continued!» make strides ahead. During the past years the General Assembly has had the happy task of welcoming a large number of new States as Members of our Organization. We are gratified at the prospect of having here with us still other new independent countries in the near future. Among these my delegation will be particularly pleased to welcome the independent States of Nigeria, the Cameroons, Togoland and Somaliland.
132.	The movement towards self-determination and independence will characterize our epoch in the perspective of history. The pattern has been set. The movement is on the march. However, where the United Nations cannot afford to relax its vigilance is in the field of preserving these newly-won freedoms, especially during the period necessary for consolidating self-determination, independence and territorial integrity in certain newly-established States:
133.	Certain recent happenings in Asia which have taken place parallel with the movement of self-determination which I have mentioned above are contradictory to the historic process of our times. In fact, the policy of pressure, violence and aggression over Tibet and Laos in contravention of the principles of the Charter are a matter of grave concern. The fact that all these actions emanate from the same country should be considered as a reason for attributing particular importance to this matter. The United Nations, which has hailed the birth of so many new countries, cannot remain indifferent when human rights, freedom, independence and territorial integrity are trampled in any corner of the world. We feel deep sympathy for the people of Tibet who have been and continue to be the victims of aggression and have suffered spiritually and materially under a policy of domination. We consider that the country which has caused these tragic events bears a heavy responsibility in the face of international opinion. In dwelling upon the tragic events of Tibet, we also consider it a duty to draw attention to the pressure exerted on the people of Chinese Turkestan and the other Moslem populations who are under Chinese communist domination.
134.	In Europe, closer political, economic and technical co-operation has characterized the period under review. Economic growth in European countries has remained impressive and the efforts for closer economic integration have already yielded results which bear great promises for the future. My Government spares no efforts to make its own contribution to the cause of progressive economic integration in Europe by participating actively in most phases of this movement, including the scheme for a common market.
135.	On the political horizon of Europe, the question of the peaceful and democratic re-unification of Germany in accordance with the freely-expressed wishes of the German people continue to retain the focus of attention. The tragedy of a great nation divided against its will cannot but bear heavily upon the international atmosphere.
136.	During the last year a new element has been added to the anxieties of the German people: the fate and destiny of over two million inhabitants of West Berlin. In a period of history when self-determination and freedom are constantly finding a wider application in vast areas of the world, it is inconceivable that the free will of over two million Berliners should be jeopardized in any way.
137.	At the same time we must note with regret that the Geneva conference, which was convened following a note sent by the Soviet Union to the interested parties, has not yet arrived at a constructive result. We hope that the negotiations among the parties concerned will culminate in a manner that will render possible the application of the principles which I have mentioned above regarding Germany.
138.	I now wish to outline briefly the views of my Government on the vital issue of disarmament, which constitutes the core of international peace and security. As a people devoted to peace and progress, the advantages which would be derived by my countrymen through disarmament are obvious. Disarmament in confidence and security will allow the Turkish people to utilize their entire resources, manpower and energy for the attainment of a higher level of economic, social and cultural advancement to which they aspire. A general agreement along those lines will undoubtedly make available substantial new resources for alleviating the plight of many under-developed regions of the world.
139.	Furthermore, any degree of disarmament under proper guarantees would in itself constitute an important measure of progress towards the establishment of peace, by laying down the first foundations of mutual confidence. That is the reason why, ever since its foundation, the Turkish Republic has made active contribution in a series of conferences and meetings devoted to the cause of disarmament both in the framework of the former League of Nations and in the United Nations. During this entire period the policy of Turkey has been based on the conviction that enduring peace can only be attained through security and that security can be achieved only through a general and controlled disarmament, including provisions for all types of weapons.
140.	The fact that the destructive power of modern weapons surpasses anything that could even be imagined two decades ago makes it all the more imperative to seek a solid foundation for maintaining a lasting peace in confidence and security. In the context of the problems facing us today, such a solid foundation for peace can and should be sought in a disarmament agreement embracing both nuclear and conventional weapons, to be enforced under a system of control that would guarantee the security of all nations so that all may live and prosper in confidence.
141.	The issues at stake are so vital that all proposals, whether substantive or procedural, demand our careful examination. We now have before us a number of concrete proposals on the subject of disarmament. My Government will do its utmost to contribute in a constructive spirit to all deliberations over these proposals. Our attitude during these deliberations would be determined in the light of these three elements: first, whether the proposal under consideration takes into account the necessity of building up confidence by providing successive and definite stages; secondly, whether adequate and effective measures of control have been devised for each successive stage; thirdly, whether the measures envisaged include provisions for conventional as well as nuclear weapons so that a balanced disarmament may be achieved. We believe that a general agreement on disarmament on these lines together with appropriate safeguards for security would be conducive to a solid and lasting peace.
142.	As far as the work of our Organization in the field of disarmament is concerned, we fully support the terms of the resolution figuring in the report of the Disarmament Commission [A/4209] which reiterates the fact that ultimate responsibility in the question of disarmament remains with the United Nations within the terms of the Charter, At the same time, we noted with satisfaction the decision taken in Geneva among four of the permanent members of the Security Council to continue conversations on disarmament in a new body [see DC/144].
143.	I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the newly elected Chairman of the Disarmament Commission, Mr. Padilla Nervo of Mexico. We are confident that he will accomplish his important duty with the success which has characterized all his previous assignments in our Organization.
144.	An objective evaluation of the international events which I have reviewed in the earlier part of my statement would, unfortunately, show that the world has not yet attained that state of peace, security and tranquillity to which we all aspire. Peace-loving countries in all parts of the world are still subjected to pressures, and the least concession or lack of vigilance under the present conditions results in tragic losses.
145.	At the same time, we are witnessing a new diplomatic activity which we hope can bring a better atmosphere. I am, of course, referring to the activities of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, who is at present a guest of the United States. Turkey is one of the neighbours of the Soviet Union. For that reason it is only natural that Turkey should be one of the countries most desirous of the establishment of peace and tranquillity between the Soviet Union and the peace-loving countries.
146.	We have heard the statements [799th meeting] made by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR in this, Assembly, as well as before and after that occasion. We like to see in these statements the foundations of bridges which might lead to understanding between East and West. There is no doubt that all mankind is eager to see an end of the uneasiness and 'the anxieties td which it has been subjected ever since the end of the Second World War. It is only through the development of real and positive indications and conditions that we can hope to establish peace and security and thus to end this uneasiness which has befallen the peace-loving nations like a nightmare
147.	Turkey believes that the relaxation of international tensions in an atmosphere of confidence constitutes an indivisible whole to the same degree as the establishment of peace and security. Therefore, tensions must be relaxed not in isolated region alone, but in the entire area stretching from Korea to Norway; otherwise, there can be no hope of a true easing of tensions. As I have already stated, no country will be more gratified than Turkey if the recent activities of the Soviet Union lead to the conditions necessary for ensuring such an improvement in international relations.
148.	Apart from the important political questions in the agenda of the fourteenth session, another field of equally vital issues awaits the enlightened deliberations of the Assembly. The struggle against poverty, disease and illiteracy demands continued and accelerated efforts by our Organization in conjunction with the work undertaken in this direction on a national and regional basis.
149.	Despite the concerted action inaugurated in the field of technical and’ economic assistance during the last decade, the under-developed countries are still confronted with great difficulties in their endeavour to create better living standards and to attain a higher economic, technical and social status. The problem of finding adequate remedies to this situation still constitutes the major challenge facing our Organization in the economic field.
150.	Reports published by the Secretariat, as well as statistical data furnished by experts in this matter, show clearly that the existing level of international assistance rendered by States or international institutions, as well as the present flow of private capital, are not sufficient to secure an adequate economic growth in the under-developed countries.
151.	The United Nations has been conducting an extensive programme of technical assistance. The establishment of the Special Fund has constituted a very important step forward in a new direction. The first projects approved by the Governing Council are already in the stage of implementation, I wish to mention especially, with my thanks, the assistance rendered to the Middle East Technical University in Ankara. We are confident that under the able guidance of Mr. Paul G. Hoffman, its Managing Director, the Special Fund will continue to accomplish successfully the duties for which it was established.
152.	In the field of international co-operation within the scope of the United Nations, the Regional Commissions have rendered outstanding services up to the present. During the last year we have welcomed with satisfaction the establishment of the Economic Commission for Africa. We congratulate the African countries for the comprehensive programme of work which they have already organized and we wish them success in their task.
153.	During the deliberations of the appropriate committees my delegation will spare no efforts in collaboration with all other delegations to support all constructive proposals directed towards achieving better living conditions in under-developed areas.
154.	In concluding my statement, I wish to reiterate the hope of my Government and of the Turkish people that the fourteenth session of the General Assembly may serve the cause of international understanding. We are confident that under the able guidance of our President, progress will be achieved towards the solution of many vital problems which retain the attention of world opinion. May our common efforts carry us forward in the path of peace.