134. I wish to congratulate the President on his election to the Presidency of the General Assembly at its twenty-third session. Many distinguished representatives of Latin America have held this high office before him and have rendered outstanding service to the United Nations in the conduct of the General Assembly’s work. I am convinced that he, too, will discharge with wisdom and dignity the great responsibilities of the Presidency.

135. This year’s General Assembly opens in an atmosphere that is neither bright nor promising. Serious international events cast their shadow over the work which has now begun. Since I come from a European country, it is only natural that I should be thinking especially of the military intervention in Czechoslovakia by the Soviet Union and other members of the Warsaw Pact. The occupation was without any justification. It was an act of force contrary to the wishes of the Government and the people of Czechoslovakia. Everybody in Denmark, regardless of political opinion, views this deeply tragic suppression of a people’s right to shape its own destiny as a brutal return to conditions which we had believed to be a thing of the past. Immediately following the invasion of Czechoslovakia, we had occasion in the Security Council to express our condemnation of this abuse of power and to call upon the occupying Powers to withdraw their forces. I want here to repeat our appeal for a speedy withdrawal so that the people of Czechoslovakia may be allowed to shape their own future in freedom.

136. Denmark has been consistently active in the efforts to bring about a relaxation of East-West tensions. The setback to détente suffered as a result of the intervention in Czechoslovakia has caused us disappointment and concern. None of us wants a reversal to the sinister time of the cold war. A détente, however, is no unilateral enterprise. Both sides must do their part to create that atmosphere of mutual confidence which is an indispensable condition for a true détente. It remains our aim to see this condition
fulfilled with a view to paving the way for a just solution of Europe’s security problems, including the problem of German reunification.

137. In this connexion, I should like to state that the Government of Denmark has welcomed the declared and unambiguous policy of détente pursued by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. The provisions of Articles 53 and 107 of the United Nations Charter have been the subject of recent debate and it has been claimed that they give a right to intervene by force in the Federal Republic of Germany. In our view, neither of these articles can substantiate that claim.

138. The tragic conflict in Nigeria has given rise to deep concern in my country. Within the framework of international organizations, Denmark has made every possible effort to assist in the aid programmes for the distressed civilians in the areas affected, directly or indirectly, by the conflict. I want to make it clear that we are and have always been directing our attention and our efforts exclusively towards the solution of the humanitarian problems. We have no wish to intervene in the political aspects of the conflict, but we have followed with the greatest interest and sympathy the various efforts in an African framework to obtain a political solution leading to a cessation of the conflict. In our view, an arms embargo might have assisted those efforts, and we find it most regrettable that outside countries. have not refrained from delivery of weapons.

139. It should be understood that human sufferings of the nature that we are now witnessing as a result of the events in Nigeria go to the heart of peoples all over the world. They are indeed felt very deeply by the Danish people. I wish, therefore, to take this opportunity to appeal once again to all interested parties to co-operate actively with the international organizations in order to ensure that effective relief can be provided and can reach all those who are in need of it.

140. This is not the place to review in detail the initiatives which Denmark has taken in recent months, alone, or together with other Nordic countries. I shall confine myself to saying that the relief action staged in Denmark is, I believe, of an unprecedented scale in Danish history, and that the substantial funds raised derive largely from voluntary contributions. The Danish Government remains ready to support any practicable suggestion designed to step up the humanitarian relief work and to make it more effective. We urge other countries likewise to be ready to increase their support to the international organizations concerned with the relief effort. Faced as we are with a tragedy of this magnitude, first priority must be given to the humanitarian task.

141. Turning to disarmament questions, we welcomed the adoption by the resumed twenty-second General Assembly of resolution 2373(XXII) supporting the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons with the result that it could be opened for signature on 1 July, 1968. A large number of countries, including Denmark, have already signed the Treaty and the Danish Government has taken action to have it ratified.

142. However, the success of the non-proliferation Treaty depends on the essential widespread accession to it. Unfortunately, certain countries have expressed reservations, and the recent events in Czechoslovakia appear to have led to a growing disinclination to sign the Treaty. It is understandable that those events have generated a feeling of insecurity. However, we are convinced that a delay in the entry into force of the Treaty would not, in the long term, serve the true interests of any country; on the contrary, it
would tend to protract the setback to détente and involve a serious risk that other tendencies, harmful to détente, may gain ground. It is the sincere hope of the Danish Government that the Treaty will soon enter into force and enjoy the necessary general support.

143. It is at the moment uncertain what questions will be in the foreground during the coming disarmament discussions in the General Assembly and at the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee in Geneva. The negotiations leading to the adoption of the non-proliferation Treaty and the discussions since then in the Disarmament Committee have reaffirmed the urgent need for a number of disarmament measures essential to the maintenance of international peace and security, among which I should like particularly to mention the need for a halt in the strategic arms race and for a total test-ban treaty. We hope it will soon be possible to take further steps towards solutions of problems relating to such important measures.

144. The Danish Government wants to introduce in the course of this General Assembly a draft resolution concerning a limited step towards disarmament and arms control which, we believe, will serve the cause of peace. We hope that this draft resolution will enjoy the support of all Members. 

145. Last year, my predecessor pointed out to the General Assembly that an  international agreement on the trade in conventional weapons would be highly beneficial. The draft resolution would request the Secretary-General to ascertain the position of Member Governments on undertaking an obligation to register with the Secretary-General all imports and exports of conventional arms, ammunition and implements of war. The Secretary-General would further ascertain the position of Member Governments on authorizing him to collect and publish at regular intervals information on transfers of conventional arms, ammunition and implements of war, and their position on the practical measures to be taken for this purpose. Finally, the draft resolution would request the Secretary-General to report on the results of his inquiry to the next General Assembly.

146. I should like to refer briefly also to the United Nations peace-keeping operations, to which the Danish Government attaches great importance. It will be recalled that, at its twenty-second session, the General Assembly, by its resolution 2308 (XXII), requested the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations to study matters relating to facilities, services and personnel which Member States might provide, in accordance with the Charter, for United Nations peace-keeping operations. For the purpose of these studies, Denmark and the other Nordic countries decided to share their experience in this field with the Committee and, last March, they submitted to its Chairman memoranda [see A/7131, para.3] giving details of the background, organization, training and other aspects of their United Nations stand-by forces. We have noted with satisfaction that other countries have since furnished similar data.

147. It is most unfortunate that the basic disagreement on the principles for financing and initiating peace-keeping operations still exists. However, the Danish Government welcomes the limited agreement which was noticeable during the spring session of the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations about studies of a technical nature. Anyway, experience shows that, in spite of the existing basic disagreement, there is a way forward as long as a pragmatic approach is applied to the problems as they arise. Therefore, we need not lose sight of the ultimate goal, a stronger and more effective United Nations with a peace-keeping and, indeed, peace-making potential far beyond its present capabilities. In my country, as in many other countries, non-governmental organizations and institutions are carrying out pioneer efforts in this field, the long-term value of which must not be under-estimated and which may serve to create in member countries the necessary popular support for such endeavours.

148. As a member of the Security Council, Denmark has had ample opportunity in the past year to follow closely developments in the Middle East. Our attitude to the concrete issues will appear from the statements we have made and the positions we have taken in the Council.

149. I think there is general agreement that the first need in the Middle East is for an over-all political solution. To that end the Security Council unanimously adopted its resolution 242(1967) of 22 November 1967 requesting the Secretary-General to designate a Special Representative to proceed to the Middle East in order to promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in accordance with the provisions and principles in the resolution.

150. Since then, Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, in his capacity as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, has been pursuing his task with admirable patience and perseverance. We regret that, in spite of Ambassador Jarring’s efforts, concrete results with respect to a political solution have not so far been achieved. It is, therefore, necessary to emphasize that, without the full co-operation of the parties, such results cannot be brought about. We urge the parties to co-operate actively with Ambassador Jarring, so as to enable him to continue his mission. The possibilities of a just and lasting peace inherent in that mission must not be lost.

151. Furthermore, it goes without saying that strict observance of the cease-fire by all parties is essential in order not to disturb the atmosphere in which the Special Representative must pursue his endeavours.

152. It is a tragic fact that the war in Viet-Nam has not been brought to an end, and that the sorely tried people of Viet-Nam still have to live under the horrors of war. Denmark maintains its repeatedly stated opinion that only negotiations can lead to a lasting peace in South-East Asia, and that a complete cessation of the bombing of North Viet-Nam is an essential first step. One encouraging development is that, since the last session of the General Assembly the bombing has been stopped partially, and that this, in turn, has led to direct talks in Paris between the United States and North Viet-Nam. We hope that the parties involved will live up to their responsibilities towards the harried people of Viet-Nam and towards mankind, and that they will seize the opportunity offered by this direct contact to definitely move the conflict from the battlefield to the negotiating table where, of course, all concerned must be willing to make concessions.

153. When hostilities cease, concerted and large-scale efforts must be made to relieve the human distress inflicted on the civilian population and to rebuild the country. As already mentioned by my Swedish colleague the Nordic countries have initiated investigations concerning the likely needs for external aid and the methods by which to organize a relief action. From statements in this general debate we have been gratified to understand that similar plans are under active consideration in other countries.

154. With regard to the question of the representation of China it remains the position of the Danish Government that only the People’s Republic of China is entitled to represent China in the United Nations.

155. In the Namibia question, it is the Danish view that unity and solidarity in this Assembly are a prerequisite for bringing real pressure to bear upon South Africa. The near-unanimous resolution 2145(XXI) by which the twenty-first session of the General Assembly decided that the Mandate of South Africa over South West Africa was terminated, was based on such unity and solidarity. The resolution has come to be regarded, and rightly so, as a milestone in the United Nations consideration of this issue. We stand firmly on that resolution and on the right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and independence. It is a matter of regret that unity and solidarity did not prevail when put to the test over the question of how to translate general principles into concrete and practical terms. I want to express the hope that the need for broad agreement in acting on the Namibia issue may be taken into consideration by this session of the General Assembly. 

156. Another important and serious problem within the context of southern Africa is that of Rhodesia. It is much to be regretted that the illegal minority régime in Salisbury is still in power, but in this case such broad agreement has prevailed within the United Nations that the Security Council was able, in May of this year, to make a unanimous decision to invoke virtually total economic sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. If these sanctions have not as yet brought about the intended results — the removal of the illegal régime in Salisbury with a view to the liberation of Southern Rhodesia under majority rule — one important reason is the lack of co-operation in the application of sanctions by Portugal and South Africa. Denmark for its part has carried out to the letter the mandatory decisions of the Security Council. We must insist that all other Member States likewise fulfil their obligations under the Charter and under these decisions of the Security Council.

157. There is no doubt that the key to a lasting solution of the problems of southern Africa lies in the Republic of South Africa, where the repulsive system of apartheid still prevails. Denmark condemns this degrading racial policy. Our position will be known from our votes and statements in the General Assembly. Without going into details, I want to state that our policy remains unaltered, and that we believe that we should all keep in mind not only the political dangers involved, but also the fundamental moral issue.

158. The Danish Government attaches great importance to the work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Considering the thorough preparations of its second session in New Delhi, its results fell short of justified expectations. It is, however, too early to predict the final outcome of the deliberations in New Delhi. Unanimous decisions were reached which within some years should bring a definite improvement in the situation between developing and developed countries.

159. It was major achievement that the need of the developing countries for a generalized system of tariff preferences was explicitly recognized. It may take some time to translate this recognition into an appropriate scheme, but I trust that it is only a matter of time.

160. Another major achievement in New Delhi was that the developed countries with market economies agreed to base the 1 per cent target for their development assistance on the gross national product. The Danish Government is actively considering how to reach this new target.

161. Our confidence in the role of the United Nations in development assistance activities is reflected in the fact that we channel 50 per cent of our total aid through the United Nations and the specialized agencies. I am pleased to announce the decision of the Danish Government to raise its total pledge to both components of the United Nations Development Programme from $10.4 million for 1968 to $15.6 million for the coming year, representing an increase of 50 per cent. My Government shares the hope expressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands that the largest contributor in absolute terms, the United States, will not curtail its contribution.

162. In the preamble to the United Nations Charter we have reaffirmed our faith in the fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations, large and small. We have stressed our desire to live together in peace with one another, as good neighbours. A look at the world today reveals how far we still are from having accomplished those high aims. We witness violations of human rights, of the dignity of man and of the rights of nations. We see war causing grief and distress. May the United Nations be the place where we meet, conscious of our great responsibility, to work under the guidance of the high principles of the Charter, so that mankind may look to the future with confidence.