1. Mr. President, I should like, in the first place, to express my Sincere gratification at your election, for you represent, among other things, a part of the world to which we feel bound by strong ties of common origin and culture. Allow me, at the same time, to express our appreciation of the exemplary way in which you are conducting our deliberations.

2. It is also my pleasant duty to convey to your illustrious predecessor, Mr, Corneliu Manescu, the sincere thanks of the Italian delegation for the wisdom with which he guided the twenty-second session of the General Assembly.

3. I extend our welcome and best wishes to Swaziland, which has recently become a Member of our family.

4. Lastly, I wish to record the great interest with which we have listened to the statements of the speakers who have preceded me on this rostrum, I do so because of their remarkable contribution to the understanding of the problems before us, as well as because of the high sense of responsibility with which, at this grave hour, they have responded to the issues confronting this session of the General Assembly.

5. In this forum, where we are pledged to carry out the principles of the United Nations Charter, our debates will be successful in promoting the common good only if we are basically sincere in what we say and at the same time, while being frank and forthright, we try to avoid bitter polemics, Here we must carry forward the dialogue begun almost a quarter of a century ago at San Francisco, a dialogue born from the new conditions imposed on international politics both by the democratic transformation taking place in today's society and by the technological revolution, At the same time, we must never forget that the creation of the United Nations was a reaction to the horrors of the Second World War and a response to the deep yearning for peace among all the peoples of the world, In this spirit, and with these memories in mind, we must honour with our deeds the principles of our Charter, which express the most fundamental needs of present-day international society.

6. Despite the repeated revival of the tragic myths of military power, racial superiority and nationalistic pride, international society realizes the increasing productivity of multilateral relations. Indeed, the future of the world may depend on the development of multilateral diplomacy and the strengthening of the organizations which embody it. That fact must be borne in mind by the great Powers, because the future of peace and human welfare, which are inherently inseparable from each other, depend in large measure on their example.

7. Unfortunately, Soviet action in Prague may have turned back the clock of history by twenty years. I say "may have" because we in Italy cannot resign ourselves to this tragic prospect. It is to be hoped that the Soviet Union is aware of the serious consequences that are likely to result from its action in Czechoslovakia and is also aware of the need to restore international legality. It is imperative that foreign troops now in Czechoslovak territory be withdrawn, especially as such a withdrawal would pose no danger to the Warsaw Pact countries. Only a withdrawal of those troops could convince the world that respect for the United Nations Charter is a reality. If, on the other hand, the Soviet Union were to continue to keep its troops in Czechoslovakia and use them also to exert pressure in that area, there would be little hope left of restoring in Europe the conditions of understanding and détente: conditions which we brought about through so much sacrifice and honesty of purpose and which would enable us to move forward towards the solution of the most serious problems still to be settled, including the German problem.

8. When we speak of détente, we mean a collective process of clarification in which all countries ought to take part on an equal footing. We cannot, therefore, share suggestions which would aim at a dialogue limited to a few great Powers, a formula which would not allow other countries to make their own contribution.

9. Here at the United Nations, in this great forum of peace, we, as Europeans and Italians, feel it our duty to declare our faith in the victory of the moral force, born of the principles of the Charter.

10. The peoples of the world have a profound sense of this fundamental need for peace and for common economic welfare, won in peace and freedom. So much harm has been done by the present crises that we must combine our efforts to prevent any return to the cold war. The Italian Government believes that this objective can and must be attained. There still are unquestionable opportunities to restore confidence and re-establish the bonds which have been so suddenly broken.

11. The events of the past decades have clearly shown that international problems cannot be solved by force alone. International society today demands not nuclear bombs but social reforms. The example set by the communist countries may he tragic because, instead of devoting their efforts to solving economic and social problems, they have delayed the evolution of international society, allocating a large proportion of their wealth to building one of the most powerful military arsenals ever seen in history.

12. On the other hand, we cannot help thinking of those areas in which social injustice is of such a magnitude as to arouse the indignation of all those who have sincerely abided by the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

13. I must re-emphasize that international society today demands not weapons but economic and social reforms, Above all, it needs genuine land reforms capable of giving dignity to the thousand million poor peasants who could thus work their own lands, assisted by the powerful help made available to human labour by modern technology.

14. The Secretary-General has rightly drawn our attention to the serious decline of moral standards in international relations, But we cannot be satisfied by a mere declaration of this fact and indulge in easy criticism of the partial inability of the United Nations to solve the international conflicts of today. We must clearly proclaim that the United Nations must be strengthened, and we must indicate without delay how this can and must be done.

15. Words, of course, are not enough, especially when words serve to feed that demon of the modern world which we call propaganda. What we must do, before it is too late, is to propose ways and means to strengthen our world Organization, We must not give up because of past failures. Our courage today must lie in perseverance. The United Nations itself possesses the legal, technical and political capability to meet the challenge of current events and the challenge of new generations.

16. I am thinking now of the enormous amount of good which could be done, for instance, by the whole family of specialized agencies, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Health Organization, the International Development Association and UNESCO, as well as the United Nations Development Fund and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, if our Governments gave them increasing financial support and greater political and moral backing.

17. We cannot, however, judge these agencies solely on the basis of their productivity expressed in economic terms, The fact is that they have also other functions, and this is particularly true of the institutions responsible for giving assistance to the developing countries. There are, to be sure, technical and managing shortcomings, and frequently also financial weaknesses. But, instead of indulging in sterile criticism, let us admit once and for all that, wherever fault may be found, the fault is ours as well.

18. How can anyone say that the United Nations is unable to fulfil its duty if, whenever there is a need to intervene in order to settle a conflict, the instruments to do so are lacking? How can we help noticing that the United Nations is sometimes paralysed by the failure of Members to provide essential financial contributions which are often denied on the basis of questionable legal arguments? 

19. We all, therefore, bear a heavy responsibility for our continuing failure to find any constructive answers to those questions, And that is why the ancient but never conquered mythology of violence and hate is rising again, Our future depends upon the course of international relations not only in the political but also in the economic field. In my country, for instance, foreign trade accounts for approximately one third of the national income. A lasting solution of the most serious social problems depends essentially on the rate of economic development. But how can we accelerate this development if we are compelled to increase our armaments? During the past twenty years national income has been greatly increased almost everywhere in the world, for the very reason that these have been years of peace, If we succeed in guaranteeing peace, we shall ensure an increase in commercial activity and also bring about an improvement in the terms of trade, which is one of the basic purposes of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

20. The principles of the United Nations presuppose that nations will live not in a system of economic self-sufficiency, but in a world of extensive international trade, That is why we have placed great hopes in the development of trade between East and West and devoted to it a substantial part of our resources,

21. I should like to make it clear that when I say that autarchy can lead to conflicts, I am referring not only to what happened in Europe during the 1930s, but also to what occurred during the 1950s, in the darkest period of the cold war. I am thereby referring to those nationalistic tendencies which are retarding some of our collective initiatives in the economic field and frustrating the liberalizing drive which is essential for the development of the less-favoured countries.

22. For those reasons our policy remains firmly oriented not only towards the widening of the European Economic Community, but also towards the expansion of its exchanges with all countries.

23. The natural trends of history emphasize every day the interdependence of all peoples. This is a fact which we recognize in theory but sometimes reject in the reality of our political actions. This is why further efforts must be made not only to revitalize our Organization, but also to expand it. Encouraged by the certainty that our concerns and aspirations are shared by all, I should like to submit for the Assembly's consideration some remarks which, I hope, may help us overcome the present difficulties.

24. Our first task must be to strengthen the authority of the United Nations, making more efficient the constitutional machinery designed to ensure respect for international law, While keeping within the present rules and structure of the United Nations, the Assembly should, in our opinion, see to it that the Charter is more satisfactorily implemented, To this end, the Assembly should co-ordinate its efforts in several directions.

25. First, it should move towards constructive solutions of a practical nature for the studies now being conducted with regard to the fundamental principles of the Charter; second, it should promote a definition of the possible forms of aggression, paying due attention to the events of the recent past; third, it should give further impetus to the work of the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations, which has been able to continue its activities essential for solving the problems of the United Nations and of the financing of peace-keeping operations.

26. The initiatives aimed at providing the United Nations with appropriate means to discharge its mandate are expressions of a profound feeling of people today. But if these initiatives are to meet with a broader response they must be accompanied by a campaign of orientation and information, especially among younger people. This is the goal pursued by the Italian proposal, already inscribed in the agenda, to impart to the teaching staff of schools a knowledge of the United Nations.

27. The prestige and the authority of our Organization depend upon its universality. For that reason Italy has emphasized the necessity that all countries be represented in the United Nations, provided, of course, that they satisfy the necessary prerequisites and accept the obligations of the Charter.

28. There are, however, objective difficulties which prevent the implementation of the principle of universality. In view of the fact that not all the States Members of the United Nations agree in defining the prerequisites for admission, we have proposed in past years a thorough and realistic inquiry as to the ways and means to secure the universality of our Organization. This applies most especially to China, I believe that careful study should be given to this subject, including consideration at the present session of the General Assembly.

29. Our second task must be to devote all our energies to promoting disarmament, for, in addition to averting the danger of war, disarmament would make vast resources available for economic and social progress. Moreover, bearing in mind this correlation between disarmament and development, the Italian Government has declared before Parliament its intention to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, We regard that Treaty above all as an instrument not only for limiting the spread of nuclear weapons, but also for promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

30. I can confirm that our intentions have not changed, Nevertheless, we have been unable to remain indifferent to the patent violation of one of the fundamental principles of the preamble to that Treaty and, at the same time, of the United Nations Charter — a violation which has taken place even before the Treaty has entered into force, Faced with such a violation, the Italian Parliament, in reaffirming its own intentions, has endorsed the decision of the Government to adhere to the Treaty at a time when it is clear that it is fulfilling the basic objective of reducing international tension which inspired it.

31. We hope that the pause for reflection may soon be overcome; we shall then be only too happy to respond to the eloquent appeal which the Swedish Foreign Minister addressed from this rostrum [1677th meeting] to all Governments. 

32. I have stated that, in our view, the non-proliferation Treaty must become an effective instrument not only for the prevention of war, but also for the achievement of peace. As far as the first aim is concerned, Italy recognizes that an early implementation of the nuclear disarmament measures contemplated in the Treaty would constitute the necessary, counterbalance of the obligations which non-nuclear-weapon States assume. It also recognizes the indispensable condition for the security of all countries, in the framework of general and complete disarmament under strict international control. As far as the second aim is concerned, we believe that the Treaty must guarantee non-nuclear-weapon States free access to the supply of nuclear fuel and to the acquisition of the necessary technology and know-how, For us, this is the meaning which the full and practical application of articles IV and V of the Treaty must involve.

33. We also consider that the search for appropriate solutions to the question of nuclear disarmament is one of the most urgent tasks which the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament must face. At the last session of that body the Italian delegation circulated a list of the measures which appear most urgent and are ripe for a fruitful discussion. It is to be noted that those measures, although with a different order of priority, appear among the proposals submitted by other States, among them the Soviet Union in its memorandum of 5 July 1968 [A/7134].

34. Our proposals are not of a theoretical nature and do not pursue objectives which can be secured only in the distant future. As in the case of underground nuclear explosions, they take into account specific needs and present possibilities.

35. I also wish to recall the proposal put forward originally by Senator Fanfani: that proposal within its realistic limits, would link nuclear disarmament with assistance to the developing countries by making available a part of the stocks of fissionable material of the nuclear Powers for use in the peaceful programmes of non-nuclear-weapon States.

36. It is also my duty to mention the important contribution towards the understanding of these problems made by the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, held in Geneva last month. In order to ensure the continuation of the work undertaken, we would favour the establishment, already commended at Geneva by many countries, of an ad hoc committee for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. That committee, composed of nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon Powers, could create conditions for fruitful co-operation in the economic field, and encourage and co-ordinate the work of all the bodies which will increasingly be called upon to deal with these problems. In our view, this would. be one of the most useful ways to ensure the validity and effective operation of the non-proliferation treaty and to discourage any temptation to resort to nuclear rearmament.

37. Among the questions listed in the agenda there are, besides nuclear energy, those concerning outer Space and the sea-bed. I should merely like to stress that the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space [See resolution 2222 (XXI)], opened for signature on 27 January 1967, must be fully and coherently applied. It is important to bear in mind that the Treaty really only lays down the general principles and therefore requires further elaboration. I sincerely hope that the report which the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space will submit to us in the next few days will indicate the possibilities of progress in this direction.

38. The problems raised by the utilization of marine resources are equally very important. The Italian delegation hopes that the Committee set up by the Assembly will be able to continue — on a structural and permanent basis — the work it has begun in order to avoid the extension of the arms race and to ensure international co-operation in the use of the reserves contained in the sea-bed.

39. In the third place, so as to build a peaceful order on lasting foundations, we must tackle with zeal and imagination the problems raised by the serious economic and social disparities which exist. The President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Robert McNamara, devoted great attention to these problems in his recent address to the Board of Governors. His speech contains a very interesting plan for an expansion of the efforts of the Bank in the developing countries.

40. On that subject may I be allowed to recall three specific Italian proposals:

(a) The Italian Parliament, taking up an appeal by a million and a half young people, has expressed the hope that the United Nations will set up a world-wide fund to combat hunger, leprosy and natural disasters;

(b) The Italian Government, with the aim of acquainting the developing countries with advanced technology and modern systems of industrial organization, proposes to participate — by contributing annually $300,000 to the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and by offering adequate buildings — in the creation in Italy, through international financing and in co-operation with UNIDO and the International Labour Organization, a United Nations centre for the training of industrial managers;

(c) As a contribution towards the same goals, Italy is prepared to provide the developing countries with access to the San Marco space programme. It is also prepared to offer the co-operation of Italian technicians for the implementation of those countries’ national projects or of projects of common interest.

41. Finally, the Italian Government wishes to continue and to enlarge within the framework of the United Nations its general action in favour of the developing countries. I am in a position to state that we are increasing our contribution to the United Nations Development Programme for 1969 by 20 per cent.

42. Action taken along the lines I have described - strengthening of the United Nations, disarmament, and development assistance — cannot alone ensure the peaceful and balanced progress of international society, unless we tackle the crises which have arisen in some regions of the world.

43. We find a confirmation of our anxieties in the latest developments in the Middle East, which have dangerously aggravated the difficulties resulting from the conflict of June 1967. We are convinced that a solution to those difficulties may be found within the framework of the United Nations. Hence, we shall continue to give our most Sincere support to the mission of Mr. Jarring, whose high capacities we fully appreciate. We shall persevere in every possible action which will relax tension and contribute to the success of the mission.

44. I should like to recall from this rostrum the idea put forward by Italy in order to overcome the difficulties connected with Security Council resolution 242(1967) of 22 November 1967 so as to make it possible for the Jarring mission to come to grips with the substance of the matters involved. Furthermore, as a result of the conspicuous economic damage caused by the conflict of June 1967, particularly to the countries of the region concerned, we must co-operate in re-habilitating the different economies, so as to prevent irreparable postponements and delays in the development plans which are so vital for the welfare of the people of the area. 

45. Another serious problem which is of great concern to us is the conflict in Viet-Nam, Although the United Nations was unable to take any direct action in this regard, the debates in this Hall and the pressure of world public opinion undoubtedly contributed to the start of the Paris negotiations. We have always maintained that there must be a political and not a military solution to that conflict. We have associated ourselves with those who consider that the 1954 Geneva Agreements offer the basis for a negotiated settlement. Yet we are deeply distressed to note that the negotiations are proceeding with exasperating slowness. We are particularly concerned to note that, at the military level, the first significant United States gesture has not been followed by the progressive reduction in hostilities that we had a right to expect. We feel, therefore, that the time has come for an urgent appeal to the parties so that, through reduction in military operations, the way may be prepared for a solution which would finally ensure a return to peace.

46. I should like now to deal briefly with the serious problems which racial hatred is stirring up in the African continent. Italy, which is firmly opposed to all forms of racial discrimination, confirms its resolve to carry out the decisions of the Security Council with regard to Rhodesia and to support every realistic effort to eradicate, especially from southern Africa, a phenomenon which we profoundly deplore as it infringes the fundamental rights of man.

47. Finally, I cannot conceal the grave anxiety and deep concern with which the Italian people view the situation in Nigeria, As we see that bloody civil war continuing, we must give increasing support to the relief work conducted by UNICEF and the International Red Cross, and try to contribute to the re-establishment of conditions of peace and security for all the people of Nigeria.

48. The Italian delegation clearly realizes the internal nature of that conflict, which has been emphasized in the resolutions adopted at the summit meetings of Heads of State of the Organization of African Unity. We are fully aware that it is the primary responsibility of the African countries to workout lasting solutions to their problems. We expect in this context that the Federal Government of Nigeria and the African countries themselves will take all necessary initiatives to bring about a solution of the crisis.

49. Keeping in mind the deep anxiety with which this problem is followed in all countries and particularly in Italy, we consider that our Organization must throw all its weight behind the action of the Organization of African Unity for a speedy and peaceful solution of this conflict, enabling all countries to engage in the work of reconstruction.

50. The proposals and the ideas I have put forward seem to me the best proof that recent events have not shaken the faith of the Italian Government in our Organization. And to the United Nations we pledge our firm and undivided co-operation.