30. Mr. President, to pay respects once again to a distinguished statesman from Latin America, after his election to the Presidency of the General Assembly, is indeed a reason for pleasure and satisfaction. Well do we remember those eminent representatives of the Latin American continent who in the same high office have rendered such signal services to our Organization.

31. My delegation is happy to welcome for the first time to the rostrum a representative from a country in Central America whose civilization can be traced to an era well beyond the first stirrings of culture in many other parts of the world.

32. This heritage of early civilization, coupled with your long experience in the politics of modern times, contains all the elements to ensure a wise and dedicated leadership of our deliberations. The years that you have spent first with UNESCO and later at Headquarters here in New York, actively participating in many fields of United Nations work, have provided you with that added and very distinctive ability one needs in order to find one’s way through the maze of Assembly lore and usage.

33. Confident of your capacity to bring the twenty-third session of the General Assembly to a fruitful conclusion, I extend to you the congratulations and good wishes of my delegation. You will, I feel sure, be a most worthy successor to Mr. Manescu.

34. This year I have come to New York with feelings of anxiety. No speaker can mount this rostrum in order to address the General Assembly without being aware of the fact that but few of his statements can be of a bright or hopeful nature. The situation in many parts of the world is such that gloom has replaced measured hope. In these circumstances the people of my country turn to the United Nations, expecting this Organization to act, to intervene or to remedy the many situations of disharmony and stress. Parliament in the Netherlands turns to me, expecting me to urge this Assembly to act, to be inventive and to show imagination. While transmitting to you the anxieties of the Dutch nation and the urgings of its Parliament, they and I are only too conscious of the restrictions preventing the General Assembly from reaching effective decisions and well aware of the strict limits imposed upon the Secretary-General’s possibilities for action.

35. Enormous concentration of naked power in the hands of a few States is a fact. The scope and possibilities of our Organization are restricted by this political reality. It is also a fact that an international community cannot reasonably function if such power is accepted as its sole basis. The United Nations might be roused into action if a group of middle Powers were to take common initiatives. An attempt to circumvent stagnation could be made by a group of such middle Powers willing to originate and stand by initiatives, even if such action could not always muster a majority. My country, for one, is ready to join other like-minded nations in efforts to revitalize and to strengthen the role of the United Nations.

36. These common efforts should not be confined to the search for diplomatic or political solutions, but should also encompass situations where ordinary human beings are being crushed by the bulldozer of destiny. Unfortunately, there are in the present-day world too many examples of large groups of peoples who are victims of conflicting interests which, for one reason or another, have not been dealt with by the United Nations.

37. I restate the willingness of my country to undertake initiatives, together with other countries, irrespective of their ideologies and regardless of the group to which they belong within this Organization, in order to improve the possibilities of effective action of our Organization in such situations.

38. One of the few areas where prospects of improved action by the United Nations family are somewhat brighter is the field of assistance by industrialized countries to those countries where economic growth has lagged behind. The Netherlands Minister in charge of Development Aid will shortly address members of this Assembly and set forth the present Netherlands policies on this issue. Therefore, I confine myself at this moment to the announcement that the Government of the Netherlands will increase its contribution to the United Nations Development Programme, including UNIDO projects, from $7.4 million to $8.6 million. This is an increase of nearly 17 per cent. This increase has been decided on by the Netherlands Government in the expectation that other countries too will increase their contributions. In this respect let me voice the confident hope that the largest contributing country in terms of money, the United States, will increase, or at least
not lower, its contribution. I trust that rumours to the contrary are without foundation.

39. This twenty-third session of the General Assembly will celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This Declaration was proclaimed to be “a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations". During its regular session two years ago the General Assembly laid the legal foundation for this common standard of achievement by adopting the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

40. Since the General Assembly designated the present year as International Year for Human Rights, it seems appropriate to reaffirm that the United Nations has achieved some important results in the establishment of these common standards. I must add. however, that the necessary complement to this achievement is still missing. Little has been done to ensure the implementation of these fundamental rights and standards. For this reason the Netherlands Government favours the appointment of a High Commissioner for Human Rights. It is to be hoped that such an important authority will make significant contributions to a better implementation of human rights.

41. Our expectations with relation to the outcome of the International Conference on Human Rights, held at Teheran from 22 April to 13 May 1968, have not materialized. Not without some concern have I noted that this Conference did not succeed in promoting a better international implementation of human rights. The Proclamation of Teheran and the resolutions adopted there make but slight reference to this urgent question. Undeniably, the
Proclamation of Teheran is an important document, since it underlines the relevance of human rights in relation to a number of burning political, economic and social problems of our world. But it also clearly shows how far the ideal proclaimed in 1948 still is from the reality of 1968. Our agenda contains a number of situations which hitherto have not been dealt with effectively. I am thinking in particular of situations in some parts of Africa.

42. The discrepancy between ideal and reality was forcibly underlined by Secretary-General U Thant when he said at Teheran:

“The pattern of history before the establishment of the United Nations and, unfortunately, also since the establishment of our Organization has shown the extent to which preoccupation for the life and the well-being of the individual give way to the requirements of military imperatives. Violence breeds violence. Fear breeds fear. Restraints of those who possess force disappear in situations where the use of force is openly encouraged."

43. The Secretary-General was proved to be tragically right by the events in Czechoslovakia a few months later. The situation in that country once again focuses our attention on military intervention by the Soviet Union, assisted this time by four of its allies, in an Eastern European country.

44. In the course of the past years we were hopeful that peaceful coexistence in Europe would gradually become a reality and thus form a valid basis for a just settlement in Europe and elsewhere. That hope for a relaxation of tension seemed well founded, since the Soviet Union and other communist countries did not cease to proclaim the necessity for consistent implementation, in relations between States, of the principles of non-interference in internal affairs and of recognition of independence and sovereignty. The military invasion of Czechoslovakia, perpetrated in complete defiance of elementary rules of international law, makes a cruel irony of the Soviet initiative pressing for reaffirmation of the principles of sovereignty and non-intervention in a resolution which was finally unanimously adopted by the General Assembly. In his speech from this very rostrum on 24 September 1965, only three years ago, the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union proposed that item as an urgent and important matter. On 21 December of the same year, the twentieth session of the General Assembly, as an outcome of Soviet insistence, adopted a resolution [2131 (XX)] containing the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty.

45. The events in Czechoslovakia came as a great shock to the people of the Netherlands. Our growing confidence that the Soviet Union had abandoned the methods of the cold war proved to be false, and our hopes have been shattered. Once again the Soviet leaders have not shied away from clamping an armed fist on Eastern Europe by means of their military might.

46. The motivation advanced by the Soviet authorities in order to justify their act of aggression against Czechoslovakia is belied by the actual situation. Allegations of an evolution towards a counter-revolution are completely unfounded. The only development in Czechoslovakia was a carefully measured beginning of personal freedom, while the solidarity with the Eastern European politico-military and economic alliances was being maintained.

47. I do not wish to linger on the pretexts used by the Soviet invaders that the military intervention had been requested by the Czechoslovakia party and Government leaders.

48. At this moment it is not yet possible to evaluate fully the general implications of the Soviet actions. Much will depend on the Soviet Government’s reactions to difficult situations which its own actions have brought about. The existing tensions remain as long as the Soviet army occupies Czechoslovakia. Withdrawal of those forces is a first essential step.

49. Whatever future action it decides to take, the action of the Soviet Government and its Warsaw Pact allies has dealt a severe blow to the policy of détente. In spite of the great shock to our confidence brought about by the occupation of Czechoslovakia, the détente remains a fundamental goal of the Netherlands Government’s foreign policy. The present setback will not deter my Government from pursuing this course, which it considers a precondition for the definite solution of the great issues which keep Europe and the world divided.

50. Let me now state that the recent events in Europe have not detracted from the great importance which the Netherlands Government attaches to the non-proliferation treaty. The Netherlands lost no time in signing this treaty after its adoption by the General Assembly. We earnestly hope that those countries which so far have not affixed their signatures to the treaty will do so at an early date. We naturally expect the nuclear as well as the non-nuclear signatories to take the necessary measures to allow this treaty to enter into force as soon as possible.

51. The Geneva Conference of Non-Nuclear States has only recently terminated its extensive deliberations on problems directly linked with the implementation of the non-proliferation treaty. One of the problems which deservedly received great attention there is that of the future application of nuclear energy to peaceful purposes. It seems logical that the International Atomic Energy Agency, which already is actively engaged in many fields of atomic energy and capable of rendering important services, should play a central role in all future activities in this field. It was gratifying that many delegations in Geneva voiced that same opinion.

52. The penetrating deliberations among non-nuclear countries on the problems of their security were, in the light of their apprehensions, understandable and justified. The delegation of the Netherlands took an active part in those discussions.

53. In our debates during last year’s session of the General Assembly it became clear that the problems related to this vital question are manifold and complicated. Simple solutions do not exist. Although the frank exchange of opinions during the Conference has undoubtedly furthered common understanding of many problems, it has become clear that the effectiveness of discussions on matters relating to non-proliferation is lessened when nuclear countries do not participate on an equal footing. It would seem, therefore, that useful and fruitful future discussions should be held with the full participation of both nuclear and non-nuclear States. For such discussions the General Assembly is eminently suited.

54. In Europe the artificial division of Germany remains, in the opinion of the Netherlands Government, the major obstacle to real peace. It is, therefore, highly regrettable that the Soviet Union has chosen to misrepresent completely the sincere search undertaken by the Federal Government of Germany for a rapprochement vis-à-vis Eastern Europe.

55. The crisis in the Middle East continues dangerously to influence the situation in the region and world peace. Like other Governments, the Netherlands Government is seriously concerned about the unfavourable developments following the adoption by the Security Council on 22 November last year of a resolution [242 (1967)] which lays the basis for a durable settlement. The gradual hardening of positions, the increase in violations of the cease-fire and the ensuing retaliations — all these symptoms point to a spiral movement towards a new explosion.

56. The efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, are being followed in the Netherlands with keen interest and with admiration for the patient and assiduous manner in which he is endeavouring to bring about the implementation of the relevant resolution. We very much hope that his efforts will soon produce concrete results and ultimate success.

57. In the course of this year, at the invitation of the respective Governments of those countries, I paid a visit to the United Arab Republic and to Israel. Both in Cairo and in Jerusalem I gained the impression that a compromise acceptable to all parties seemed to lie within the realm of possibility. Different elements of such a compromise solution were discernible. However, the deeply rooted mistrust between the principal parties has so far made it impossible for Mr. Jarring to achieve real progress. Nevertheless, the mission entrusted to him remains, in our opinion, by far the best way of achieving a settlement.

58. If I do not touch on all subjects which interest the Netherlands, this is certainly not for lack of interest, but solely because in the general debate we all have to make a careful choice.

59. In the past my delegation has always devoted much time and interest to the question of peace-keeping operations. The elaborate preparations which the Netherlands Government has made and continues to make for maintaining a stand-by force have been duly communicated to the Committee of Thirty-Three, of which we are a member. We hope that in the future work of that Committee some further barriers which so far have prevented significant progress may be removed.

60. One other question on our agenda upon which I should comment briefly is the important item which was discussed for the first time during the twenty-second session of the Assembly at the initiative of the delegation of Malta — the item concerning the peaceful uses of the ocean floor. It is understandable that, because of the time devoted to the debate during the last Assembly, that debate did not immediately lead to more definite action; the complexity and diversity of the problems involved needed first of all to
be sorted out and itemized. Much useful work has been done by the Ad Hoc Committee to Study the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction, and I should like to pay a tribute to those delegations which during the course of the year made such valuable contributions to the study of this problem. My delegation will take an active part in the coming debates in the First Committee and at this moment I will confine  myself to restating the basic principles which guide the Netherlands Government with regard to future uses of the ocean floor. We continue to consider the United Nations as the appropriate Organization for the study and further elaboration of all principles involved in the peaceful use of these vast subaquatic regions. The study and elaboration of an international régime which would take due account of the economic interests of the developing countries would seem desirable. In the course of the debates on the report of the Ad Hoc Committee, consideration might be given to the advisability of constituting a more permanent committee which would receive a new and more comprehensive mandate.

61. The continued codification of international law is another subject of special interest to my Government. This activity contributes greatly to the furthering of an orderly society in an orderly world. I welcome the initiative of the International Court of Justice in publishing for the first time an annual report [A/7217] and I hope this will receive the attention it deserves.

62. Many other subjects of interest are mentioned by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report. One of those is the activity of the United Nations “to advise, assist and participate in arrangements which are the responsibility of Indonesia for the act of free choice” [A/7201/Add.1, para. 4] for the people of West Irian. The Netherlands Government continues to be interested greatly in the implementation of the agreements of 1962 concluded with the Government of Indonesia and looks forward to the report announced by the Secretary-General at the conclusion of his representative’s mission to West Irian.

63. Although the subject is not an item on our agenda, the war in Viet-Nam is ever present in our minds. So far the negotiations in Paris have hardly progressed. More than ever a speedy and honourable end to this cruel conflict is imperative. We greatly fear that the continuation of hostilities will fatally imperil the very existence of the peoples of North and South Viet-Nam. We regret, therefore, that it has not proved possible for the United Nations to play a constructive role in furthering a solution to this frightful conflict.

64. I cannot leave this rostrum without conveying to the Assembly the feelings of deep and anxious concern awakened in all sectors of the Dutch people by the unhappy events in Nigeria. The fratricidal strife raging in the eastern region of one of Africa’s largest countries has brought sorrow, death, despair and untold suffering to its civilian population. The tragedy of this conflict is all the more deeply felt by my Government, since we entertain warm feelings towards the inhabitants of that unfortunate country.

65. Within a few days after a televised appeal for assistance, approximately $4 million was contributed by private individuals in the Netherlands. It was a tangible expression of the compassion felt in the Netherlands for the suffering civilian population. Our relief actions have been co-ordinated with actions of other countries and with the International Red Cross, to which an aeroplane was made available by the Netherlands Red Cross.

66. Since the sufferings of the civilian population in Nigeria continue and since circumstances do not allow thousands of civilians to receive much-needed relief, numerous voices are heard in my country appealing for speedy and effective assistance to the suffering victims. As a result of these appeals the Netherlands Government has explored all means of achieving this goal. My Government hopes that the Organization of African Unity, acting as the appropriate organization, will bring about an end to the armed conflict. With regard to the resolution adopted at the Conference of Heads of State held recently in Algiers, we were particularly impressed by the appeal to all interested parties to co-operate with a view to ensuring the rapid dispatch of humanitarian aid to all those who are in need of it. The Netherlands Government strongly endorses this appeal. In this context I should like to express here the feelings of appreciation of my Government for the unrelenting efforts of His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie and the other five members of the Consultative Council towards reaching a basis of understanding for future peaceful developments.

67. My Government has likewise noted the participation of the Secretary-General in co-ordinating the humanitarian assistance through his personal representative in Nigeria. We feel that a report of Mr. Gussing on his activities in Nigeria might constitute a valuable basis for dispersing the apprehension of people all over the world. Should it be possible to bring about a discussion in and subsequent common action by this Assembly directed towards co-ordinated efforts in the humanitarian field, the Netherlands Government would wholeheartedly promote such a development.

68. I know I am speaking on behalf of the people of the Netherlands when I make a further appeal to the parties in the conflict to cease their armed confrontation and to establish the necessary guarantees for the preservation and well-being of the thousands of civilians in the war-stricken part of the country.

69. Mr. President, in times of trouble and tribulations we must use our powers to the utmost. But even this will not be sufficient if we cannot count on the blessings of the Lord Almighty. For that blessing I pray in order to strengthen your efforts and those of all members of the twenty-third session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
