137. Mr. President, allow me at the outset to express my delegation’s special pleasure at the election of the Guatemalan Minister for Foreign Relations, Mr. Arenales, to the presidency of the General Assembly. I should like to extend to him my heartiest congratulations on that token of esteem and confidence given him by the Members of this Organization. There is no doubt that the General Assembly will need all Mr. Arenales’s statesmanship to accomplish its work and confront the challenge offered to it by the complexity of the various international problems. I assure him of my delegation’s support and co-operation in the fulfilment of his task.

138. I should also like to pay tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Manescu, who led our deliberations with skill and distinction during the last session of the General Assembly, which will surely have a special place in the history of our Organization. We are all beholden to him for the untiring efforts he put forth in the cause of world peace throughout the year of his presidency.

139. This year we are meeting with our thoughts deeply concerned by the serious, indeed grave, events that mark the development of international relations. Several of the speakers who have preceded me at this rostrum have rightly stressed their concern at the virulence that has been injected into the international political scene by those events and those conflicts. We cannot overemphasize their effect on international stability, which itself is all too delicately balanced. We in the United Nations have the moral obligation to examine closely all the evils that are poisoning the life of the international community in order to isolate and begin to eradicate them from the realm of human and international relations. 

140. Today we are witnessing a series of distressing events and developments, ranging from the policy of apartheid to the use of force for territorial conquest or the settlement of disputes. It is extremely painful to watch blows directed against human dignity and the universal principles that govern relationships between sovereign and independent countries. We cannot be content with enunciating principles; we must also mobilize our efforts to ensure respect for them by all countries and throughout the world. The
International Year for Human Rights affords us a good opportunity to remind ourselves of the urgent need to act on principle. As we detest slavery, so we must take alarm at the attempts that some are making to impose their will on others by force or accomplished fact. The Organization has always attached prime importance to the eradication of apartheid wherever it still exists; that is a noble task to which my country has lent is wholehearted support.

141. The eradication of the last vestiges of colonialism is another subject that has continued to occupy this Assembly’s attention and has called for continual efforts by our Organization. It is true that enormous progress has been made towards that goal. However, that is not enough. As we become a great family of independent countries, we are bound to ensure that its members learn to join forces in building an international order that will enable them to live in security and to develop mutually advantageous relations.

142. That, indeed, is the reason why Member States have undertaken by the United Nations Charter to act in conformity with certain fundamental principles, such as the sovereign equality of all countries, the settlement of international disputes through peaceful means, and abstention from the threat or use of force.

143. It should also be noted that in 1965 the General Assembly adopted a declaration on the inadmissibility of intervention in the domestic affairs of States and the protection of their independence and sovereignty [resolution 2131(XX)]. Unfortunately, deeds have not always conformed to those principles. That poses a serious problem which must concern all States, large and small, that have undertaken the duty to promote the purposes of the United Nations Charter.

144. After those general considerations, I would comment on the salient points of the current international situation.

145. I should like to begin with Europe. I believe that the situation brought about by recent events in Czechoslovakia deserves our special attention. I do not want to dwell on the distressing nature of those events, since my Government has already expressed its views on them. Nevertheless, I want to express my concern at their international effects. We all know that within twenty years European crises brought about two world wars that caused indescribable losses and suffering. Yet the end of the Second World War did not mean the beginning of peace. Europe has since experienced a long period of “cold war”. Later, when certain propitious factors generated and quickened trends towards reducing European tensions, we welcomed those trends with relief. Distrust began little by little to give way to a better understanding among European countries owing to increased contacts in several areas. There was reason to hope that that happy change in East-West relations would in the end surely create an atmosphere of trust which would in turn facilitate the settlement of the major unsolved problems by bringing about an era of peace and lasting security in Europe. The General Assembly, aware of the importance of increasing contacts and of developing a spirit of co-operation among all European countries, saw fit in 1965 to adopt a resolution [2129(XX)] to further the improvement of good-neighbour relations among European States with different social and political régimes. However, the military intervention in Czechoslovakia seriously affected the trend towards détente. Furthermore, there is reason to fear that deterioration of the European political climate will render more difficult the settlement of the problems that are still awaiting solution in other parts of the world.

146. Thus we express the firm hope that it will be possible to promote understanding and relations based on fruitful co-operation advantageous to all European countries and furthering both regional and world peace. Otherwise distrust and discord will again prevail on the European scene and increase the anxieties of a world already bent beneath the weight of various international conflicts and of an arms race that is hard to check.

147. indeed, all too many conflicts seriously threaten international peace and stability. Among those the situation created in the Middle East by the war of June 1967 is still a major cause for concern. It is our duty to increase our efforts towards finding a solution to that conflict as soon as possible, especially since opportunities to solve it by peaceful means cannot be considered permanently available. incidents along the cease-fire line reveal the explosiveness of the present situation. The continuance of the crisis, with the prolonged occupation of the Arab territories and the disregard of the General Assembly resolutions concerning Jerusalem, is a serious threat both to the stability of the region and to world peace.

148. The efforts of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Jarring, and the concurrent steps taken by a number of countries have not so far been crowned with success. The main reason for that situation is the failure to enforce the Security Council resolution [242(1967)] of 22 November 1967, which nevertheless raised great hopes when it was adopted and is still, in my Government’s opinion, the most valuable instrument for settling the problem. It must be noted, furthermore, that the moderation and understanding shown by the Arab countries did not meet the positive response they deserved. We consider that the prospect of a political solution still lies in the success of Mr. Jarring’s mission. His wisdom, tact and perseverance deserve all praise.

149. Turkey considers the maintenance of peace and stability in the region one of the basic goals of its policy, and is constantly working in that direction. The Assembly has many times heard statements reiterating our twofold opposition to the use of force and to reliance on faits accomplis for the purpose of gaining territory and political advantage. Thus we must do all in our power to ensure application of the Security Council resolution, to end the conflict in the Middle East, and thereby to create a stable state of peace in the region.

150. I come now to a question of direct concern to my country: that of Cyprus.

151. Since the serious crisis of the end of last year, a relative calm has been re-established in Cyprus. The Turkish Government, which welcomed the Secretary-General’s appeals and his offer of good offices to pacify the island, is hopeful that pacification will be speeded by his action. Turkey has also favoured bilateral contacts in Cyprus. Current talks between the two communities are aimed at exploring the conditions of a joint life for both communities. Turkey believes that they can achieve satisfactory results if they are based on recognition of the legitimate rights and interests of both the island’s communities.

152. We consider that the success of those exploratory talks can open the way to a final, negotiated and joint solution of the problem among all the parties. We are of the opinion that it is extremely important not to allow the opportunity open to us to slip by; for, if that peaceful initiative were to fail, the remaining options would be very limited. 

153. Likewise, we sincerely believe that the effective presence of the United Nations Force in Cyprus is of special importance. We should like here to pay tribute to the United Nations authorities for the efforts they have made to maintain normal conditions in Cyprus.

154. I should also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the countries that are contributing to the maintenance of the United Nations Force in Cyprus.

155. The situation in South-East Asia still gives rise to concern because of the war in Viet-Nam. We continue to be hopeful that the Paris talks will lead to a political solution of that conflict in the spirit of the 1954 Geneva Accords, so as to restore peace and stability to that part of the world.

156. I feel that the problems now confronting the African continent go beyond the borders of Africa and concern all mankind. For that reason the material and moral support of the international community is of vital importance in solving those problems.

157. I am sorry to note that, since the twenty-second session of the General Assembly, no substantial progress has been achieved in the question of Namibia, which continues to be of serious concern to my delegation, especially since Turkey is a member of the United Nations Council for Namibia. The stubborn refusal of the South African Government to co-operate with the Council in finding a just solution to that problem represents a lamentable attitude about which the General Assembly expressed its deep concern in a resolution [2372(XXII)] adopted at the twenty-second session. The Security Council must give priority to study of that very threatening situation in order to lay down the steps that must be taken.

158. Another matter, that of Southern Rhodesia, is still causing concern to my Government. In fact the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, under its inhuman policy of racial discrimination, continues to oppress the majority of the country, deprives the Rhodesian people of its right to self-determination, and creates an extremely serious situation that may threaten the peace and security of the African continent. Turkey, which has always supported the resolutions adopted on the question of Southern Rhodesia, finds that attitude intolerable, and considers it necessary to enforce strictly the measures drawn up by the Security Council against Southern Rhodesia and always fully supported by Turkey.

159. In the present international situation, with its serious disturbances, the question of disarmament takes on special importance. The lack of progress towards general and complete disarmament must not discourage us in our efforts. On the contrary, the concrete results achieved with regard to collateral measures should strengthen our determination to continue the pursuit of our goals.

160. I should like here to express my Government’s satisfaction at the outcome of the work for the drafting of a treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons [resolution 2373(XXII)]. We are hopeful that that treaty will be followed by further constructive measures which will help us to advance towards total disarmament.

161. I should now like to express some ideas on the economic problems of developing countries.

162. The first United Nations Development Decade is ending without substantially changing them. The economic growth of the developing countries has not reached the hoped-for rate. The results of the second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development have also been disappointing. The gap that separates rich and poor, instead of decreasing, has continued to widen. In our opinion the lack of a world development strategy has been one of the main reasons for that situation.

163. At present, United Nations organs are carrying out studies of the various tasks involved in preparing the forthcoming Development Decade. The very modest results of the first Decade compel us to be more courageous and precise in formulating the policies and measures to be implemented during that new period, which will doubtless be a decisive phase in the struggle of the less developed countries against the evils of under-development.

164. Some of the great economic problems confronting developing countries are of special urgency. I should like particularly to mention the concern created by rapid population growth in relation to projected food production. Malnutrition is also raising serious problems, which we feel that the United Nations must carefully examine. I am also happy to express here our appreciation for the joint programmes of technical assistance and pre-investment assistance organized as part of the United Nations Development Programme, whose financial resources must be increased.

165. On the eve of the second Development Decade, we consider the basic task still to be that of formulating a world development strategy based on each country’s individual efforts and backed by converging measures and policies negotiated on the various levels of a more active international co-operation. Only through such a policy can we promote efforts aimed at solving the problems of the developing world.

166. Before concluding I should like to express my delegation’s sincere welcome to two new Members of our Organization, Mauritius and Swaziland. My delegation extends to them its heartfelt greetings and expresses its satisfaction at this continued growth of our community of independent nations.

167. Whatever disappointment we feel from time to time, I prefer to conclude my statement on a more optimistic note. This regular session of the General Assembly is the twenty-third since our Organization was founded. We know that this Organization, which embodies the ideals of men who desire universal peace and security, has not succeeded in solving the problems that stand in the way of that goal. However, the fact that our eyes inevitably turn to the United Nations each time we face a complicated and threatening situation proves our unbounded confidence in the part the Organization is called to play in establishing a just and lasting international order. We must exert all our efforts to draw nearer to the day when all mankind will begin to enjoy the blessings of that order.