Mr. President, having known you for the years you have been representing your country in the United Nations and having known your objective way of thinking and your eagerness to co-operate, I am not simply following a traditional custom by congratulating you, I extend to you the most sincere felicitations of the Afghan delegation and wish to express my personal pleasure at your unanimous election to the presidency of the eighteenth session of the General Assembly. This tribute goes not only to your person and the people of Venezuela but also to all peoples of Latin America, whose great contributions to the cause of humanity are appreciated all over the world and upon whom we from the heart of Asia look with great respect and great esteem. I hope that under your leadership this session of the Assembly will answer the expectations of all those who consider it to be one of overriding significance.
37.	During the period between the last session and this session of the General Assembly, there was a change of government in my country. Therefore, at the outset of my participation in the general debate, I think I should say a word about this change,
38.	First of all, I would like to state that our traditional policy of non-alignment remains unchanged. This policy is firmly based on friendship with all, non-alignment with any of the military blocs and peaceful coexistence and co-operation with all nations of the world, regardless of any differences in political, economic or social systems. This policy of non-alignment, because of its traditional form, has enabled us to exercise our keen interest in all international situations with impartiality towards all peoples and nations and with bias against none. We believe that in a world where any event in one part affects all parts of the globe, such a realization is most essential and significant, at least for a country like mine.
39.	The historical nature of our non-alignment, predating the divisions and differences prevailing in the world today, has justified us in believing that any doubt as to our sincerity on the part of anyone in the sphere of our international life should be completely unexpected. Our judgement of all international situations remains absolutely independent, based entirely on the principle of impartial analysis of all situations on their merits.
40.	The full understanding of our policy and appreciation of our sincerity by all friendly countries is a great source of satisfaction to us, and the co-operation and assistance received by us from them is gratifying indeed,
41.	In the course of the last year, we have not only continued to maintain our relations of amity and cooperation with the countries of our continent, of Europe, of the Americas and Africa, but I am pleased to state that we have established diplomatic relations and ties of friendship with more countries of Latin America and the newly independent countries of Africa, with whom we share so many common aspirations. In this connexion, the maintenance of good relations with our neighbours has been our foremost, earnest and natural desire, and it has thus been fulfilled.
42.	The Assembly may recall that the Foreign Minister of Iran, in his statement on 23 September 1963 in the general debate [1211th meeting], expressed his happiness that after a year and a half of negotiations, the personal efforts and good offices of His Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah of Iran were instrumental in restoring normal diplomatic relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan, and he expressed the hope that the future association between Afghanistan and Pakistan would serve as a factor of great value in preserving the stability and peace of the region. This was an expected friendly statement coming from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran, with whom we share the highest sentiments of friendship and neighbourly relations. I would like to give expression to the appreciation of my country for the friendly personal efforts of His Imperial Majesty in this respect, and to state that we are happy indeed that these diplomatic relations are restored, and that as a consequence Afghanistan once again enjoys diplomatic relations with that country in its geographical vicinity.
43.	While I share the hope of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran that the restoration of diplomatic relations will serve as a factor of great value in preserving the stability and peace of our region, I also hope that it may result in the elimination of the basic political differences between Afghanistan and Pakistan by peaceful means and by mutual understanding between these two countries.
44.	The change of government in Afghanistan, in connexion with our internal administrative, political, economic and social conditions, has its significance only for our own people by being constructive and progressive. I shall not therefore take the time of the Assembly on this matter, but I should mention one point which bears upon the connexion between our political and social reforms for the welfare of our own people and the principles underlying the Charter of the United Nations. This deals with the drafting of a new constitution based on principles of true democracy in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the Afghan traditional way of life, derived from the spirit of our people and their deep conviction concerning the spiritually worshipped principles of equality, dignity, freedom of the individual and social justice.
45.	All the speakers who have preceded me in this general debate have referred to the new developments which distinguish the favourable atmosphere inaugurating this session. The Afghan delegation welcomes these developments most heartily. In a world and in circumstances in which no nation, large and powerful or weak and small, can expect to fulfil its national aims except in conditions of peace and co-operation among nations and in which there is no alternative to peaceful coexistence for anyone, a country like Afghanistan is second to none in expressing its hope that this unfavourable atmosphere will be preserved in the interest of mankind as a whole.
46.	As a starting point in the direction of mutual confidence and understanding and the relaxation of international tensions, the realization of the world situation by the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom, which resulted in their agreement on a partial test ban, has rightly proved to be a source of relief for all mankind. The mere fact that so many countries of the world rushed to sign this treaty, without hesitation and with such great enthusiasm, demonstrates how great the need is felt in the world for even the smallest steps in the direction of international understanding, peace and security. One should pause and think of the moment when the responsible Powers would succeed in answering the legitimate expectations of mankind for the elimination of the sources of the fear of destruction by terminating the nuclear arms race in all environments and by the agreement of all nuclear or potential nuclear Powers.
47.	The Secretary-General has stated in his introduction to the annual report, that "the achievement of disarmament continues to be the most important problem of our time" [A/5501/Add.1, sect. II]. With this we fully agree, and we should like to say that while the goal of general and complete disarmament remains as remote as ever, we venture to express the hope that further essential, immediate steps will follow and that the practical political meaning of this favourable start will help in bringing about more favourable and effective measures.
48.	We wish the negotiations between the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom every success. At the same time, we would like to express our deep concern about the circumstances which have made it impossible for certain other Powers, equally responsible for peaceful arrangements to avert the danger of nuclear war and for bringing reliable success to complete, general and universal disarmament in the world, to participate in the negotiations. In this connexion we wish to stress that no effort should be spared by the United Nations, and especially the big Powers, to seek such solutions as would result in universal support for peace by all countries of the world, including France and China. We believe that the existing differences can be overcome by the wisdom and leadership of which all these countries are capable, and particularly by a realistic approach to them by the United Nations. The attention of the General Assembly, therefore, should be directed to a serious consideration of the French point of view in the nuclear field, and the participation of the People's Republic of China in disarmament arrangements and its rightful representation in the United Nations.
49.	Since these negotiations primarily involve the big Powers, we strongly urge the Secretary-General of the United Nations to do his best, at the request and on the basis of the feeling of the General Assembly, to impress on them the concern of the smaller countries, Members of the United Nations, with which he is fully acquainted through his constant contact with them. It is hoped that the representatives of the big Powers, realizing the importance of the views of all countries in matters of war and peace, will see to it that the constructive views of other Members of the United Nations —in other worlds, the will and desire of the majority of the people of the world— have an expressive, effective and strong voice in all negotiations and talks which would affect the future of mankind. We hope that the Secretary-General will present the views of the Members of the United Nations in any negotiations where they are not directly participating.
50.	We are fully aware that this suggestion involves at least two important points.
51.	In the first place, the United Nations should not be considered as only a convenient meeting place, as suggested in some quarters, but should play its role as the most effective force in world affairs and, in the opinion of the Afghan delegation, the only one.
52.	Secondly, the Secretary-General, to fulfil his duties, should expand his constant contact with the Members of the United Nations and never allow himself to be confined only to the views of certain Members.
53.	The statements made by the President of the United States [1209th meeting] and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union [1208th meeting], in connexion with the desire of these two great nuclear Powers to search for further agreement, are a great source of encouragement in themselves. Yesterday, similar encouraging statements were added by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom [1222nd meeting].
54.	While all of us realize that, with so many problems confronting the world, an effort to reach the moon may seem to be far removed from realism, one cannot ignore the importance of the spirit of a search for peace in any form or by any measures. Here we share the opinion so wisely expressed by James E. Webb in a statement made a few days ago, that "in itself co-operation in a space activity between the great antagonists of the cold war is a thrilling prospect. It is one more step towards co-operation on earth, towards the banishment of the fear of the annihilation of life as we know it.".
55.	By realizing the importance of a step by step approach, therefore, we hope for an atmosphere in which the solution of all central problems will become possible later. Although not a nuclear Power, even potentially, it was with this understanding that Afghanistan signed the test ban treaty, despite the fact that the treaty has no practical effect so far as my country is concerned. However, it was felt that certain universal consequences of the treaty justified our adherence to it. First, the treaty, at least partially, covers the field of nuclear weapons which are destructive even when tested under controlled conditions. Secondly, because of their destructive nature, nuclear weapons cannot remain the concern only of the Powers possessing them, but of all humanity which would suffer equally, and perhaps more, from their effects. Thirdly, we believe that the treaty is a constructive step towards a thaw in the cold war and the lessening of international tension.
56.	The same meaning can be attached to the establishment of the direct line of communication between Moscow and Washington, and we hope that such measures of security will eventually connect all responsible centres on matters of war and peace,
57.	We hope that the climate of agreement will be extended to other practical measures for increasing international security, and that the intention that has been heralded in the preamble to the limited test ban treaty for reaching agreement on a comprehensive treaty covering underground tests will be implemented on a priority basis.
58.	The next important step should be in the direction of the destruction of nuclear weapons. This is the real goal which, if not guaranteed immediately and then achieved speedily, may even increase the sense of insecurity and undermine the partial and step by step measures already taken.
59.	The other thing which is of great importance to the Afghan delegation is the significance of the role which the United Nations can and should play at this stage in major problems of war and peace, instead of devoting itself to minor problems. If the time is really auspicious for joint efforts on all levels, the majority of the Members of the United Nations, composed of smaller countries, should be conscious of their responsibility to devote their efforts and co-operate towards the achievement of these goals. In this connexion, I pledge my delegation to join in all sincere efforts to fulfil the promise inherent in the present situation.
60.	We agree with the Secretary-General, who, in his introduction to the annual report, notes that the "crisis of confidence" faced by the United Nations last year has largely disappeared [A/550l/Add.1, sect. XII], We admire the spirit of optimism which pervades his report, and we wish also to pay him a warm tribute on his admirable achievements since he has been burdened with the great responsibilities of Secretary-General of the United Nations.
61.	The strengthening of the United Nations, at the present stage in international affairs, is of more significance than it has ever been. The achievements of this Organization, and its acceptance of increasing responsibilities, make it more urgent than ever before that no nation should hesitate in giving the Organization its full moral and material support. Afghanistan, within the limits of its ability, will maintain its position of not hesitating to fulfil its obligations. It is our earnest hope that an adequate solution will be found for the financial difficulties with which the organization is confronted, and that full consideration will also be given by the General Assembly to making the Organization more effective by providing for adequate representation of all its Members on its various organs.
62.	The role that the United Nations has played in contributing to the recent relaxation of international tension cannot be denied. The contribution made by the non-aligned countries, as a consequence of the decision of the United Nations as a whole in the most crucial problem, that is to say, general and complete disarmament, should receive the tribute it deserves. The test ban treaty is certainly an outgrowth of the disarmament negotiations carried out under the auspices of the United Nations, and this Assembly should not fail to continue its full support of the work of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament and to urge more co-operation in this field.
63.	The Foreign Minister of Brazil touched upon this important point in his speech [1208th meeting]. He regretted that the Moscow meeting was held outside the province of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, and we fully agree with him that the question was, as demonstrated later by so many countries, a matter of common interest to all Members of the United Nations, particularly the members of the Disarmament Committee as a representative body of the United Nations.
64.	The proposal made by the Soviet Union [1208th meeting] to convene in the first quarter or the first half of 1964 a conference of the States members of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, with the participation of leading statesmen at the highest level, based on the purpose of reinforcing the success resulting from the signing of the test ban treaty and bringing about a radical shift in the disarmament talks, outpacing the arms race with a view to putting an end to it eventually, is therefore not only a useful and effective proposal, but also a desirable one, within the framework of the United Nations. Afghanistan hopes that this proposal will meet with the agreement of all parties concerned, through the support of the General Assembly. In this connexion we repeat our hope that France will also find it possible to participate, and will add its contribution to the work of the Committee.
65.	Afghanistan similarly welcomes the desire expressed by the United States and the Soviet Union for an arrangement to keep weapons of mass destruction out of outer space, and the proposal made by the United States [1209th meeting] for joint efforts in the regulation and exploration of space, including possibilities of a joint expedition to the moon, as already mentioned.
66.	As representative of a developing country, I should emphasize the importance of the consideration of economic and social questions by the General Assembly. I hope we are not wrong in expecting that the desire for international co-operation and relaxation of tension will extend its practical effects to these fields. We welcome the recent development and progress encouraged by the United Nations Development Decade and hope that, by the end of this decade, the removal of major obstacles in the way of free trade, normalization of commodity prices and increased investment in the developing countries by the developed countries will be accomplished.
67.	Afghanistan has always supported and will continue to support the economic, social and cultural activities of the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Afghanistan was, among other countries, a strong supporter of the idea of convening a United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and a party to the decisions to this effect taken in Cairo and Belgrade. We are happy that arrangements for this conference are now being completed. We hope that the conference will solve the trade problems and abolish the barriers of discrimination between nations, and will deal with all the vital questions of trade between the developed and under-developed countries. Such co-operation will not remain confined to its specific field, but will in turn extend its practical effects in the expansion of international co-operation in all other fields and contribute further to the relaxation of international tension. This co-operation is of particular importance between countries living in the same region and, more particularly, neighbouring countries.
68.	We would welcome the favourable consideration of the creation of a universal international trade organization which might seek solutions for the urgent problems of world trade, and for the supervision of the implementation of the results of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Afghanistan will also consider with interest the idea of working out the fundamental principles of economic and trade agreements and the effectiveness of long-term trade agreements for the stability and development of international exchanges. We shall welcome any declaration of principles of international co-operation whenever such a proposal is submitted for the consideration of the United Nations.
69.	It was encouraging when the President of the United States emphasized that the provision of development assistance by individual nations must go on, but that the United Nations must also play a larger role in helping bring to all men the fruits of modern science and industry in various fields that the President enumerated. Among the many different areas mentioned In his statement, we would welcome most heartily the attention of the General Assembly to a world centre for health communications under the World Health Organization, regional research centres for advancement of medical knowledge and training of scientists and doctors for the developing nations, and particularly a world-wide programme of farm productivity and food distribution.
70.	Before touching on a subject which is of special importance to my country, I would like to express my gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Paraguay, who in his statement [1212th meeting] acquainted us with his views on the same point. I join him in the appeal he made for the good will of the General Assembly, so that it may in due course consider the possibility of adopting a unanimous recommendation which would include the solution of problems of international trade of States which do not enjoy the privilege of having sea coasts. At this session once again, I wish to draw the attention of the Assembly to a number of United Nations resolutions, which, with the purpose of promoting world trade and international co-operation, supported free access of land-locked countries to the sea.
71.	At its eleventh session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 1028 (XI), which affirmed that the need of land-locked States, and States having no access to the sea for adequate transit facilities, should be recognized for promoting international trade. This resolution further invites all Members of the United Nations: "... to give full recognition to the needs of landlocked Member States in the matter of transit trade and, therefore, to accord them adequate facilities in terms of international law and practice in this regard ..."
72.	The first four articles of the 1958 Convention on the High Seas, which is now in force, recognize this right of free access to the sea, and we hope that the Conference on Trade and Development next year, with regard to solutions for the purpose of free trade among nations, will take into account the right of one sixth of the nations of the world, which happen to be land-locked.
73.	There are many items on our agenda which require the urgent attention of the General Assembly. Most of them are chronic problems before the United Nations, some of which, if unchecked, could destroy the pervading optimism.
74.	The items related to colonialism, the deprivation of peoples and nations of their right to equality, independence and self-determination, or any other form of violation of human rights, deserve the most serious consideration of the General Assembly. I have not touched upon these individual points because the views of the Afghan delegation on these problems have been repeatedly stated and remain unchanged. They will be further detailed as such items come up for discussion before the General Assembly.
75.	However, I do wish to add at this point that most of these problems directly affect the peoples of Africa and of Asia, and it is the awakening of these peoples themselves which is the most and perhaps the only important factor in the solution of these problems. This awakening has started in a great way, and therefore our hopes are very strong that the aspirations of these people will soon be fulfilled. Their co-operation among themselves, and with other Members of the United Nations, their solidarity and unity for the achievement of their goals, is of the greatest importance indeed.
76.	The first step taken at Bandung for the achievement of these goals has been followed in a most significant manner by another step recently taken in Addis Ababa. The Summit Conference of Independent African States in Addis Ababa is no less a source of joy for us than the Conference of Bandung, and it should be hailed not only by the Asian and African countries, but also by all Members of the United Nations, as another force for solidarity among the Members of the United Nations, which is so important for the achievement of the goals of this Organization. Therefore, we wish to congratulate the nations of Africa and all the Members of the United Nations on this historic achievement.
77.	To conclude, it is our earnest hope that the signs of improvement in the international situation will urge us on to ever greater efforts to achieve lasting peace and security.
