Mr. President, I wish, first, to convey to you my warmest congratulations on your election to the high post you occupy. I am convinced that the outstanding qualities, of which you have given proof in the course of your many years of international endeavour, will make you a brilliant leader and an admirable President of the General Assembly. Latin America cannot fail to be proud that one of its prominent sons now directs our debates. In this happy circumstance I see an augury for success. Our America, a continent of peace and the friendly settlement of international differences, today directs the business of an Assembly which we all trust will go down in the annals of the United Nations as the session that opened the gates to a new period of coexistence among the peoples of the world.

24. This moment is doubly important to my country. In a few days, with the handing Over of power to the new authorities, a difficult chapter in our internal affairs will have ended and another under the sign of national concord will have begun. The deeper meaning of the period now drawing to its close has been the ending of apparent dissension, allowing expression to the underlying realities of the truly democratic tendencies of our people. Their voice was heard during the last elections, whose results rewarded the constancy of the men who, from the seat of government, had led the country to this expression of popular will.

25. Today Argentina, with renewed faith, adds its endeavours to those of all the Members of this Organization to achieve co-operation, peace and collective security, for my country knows that it is the common responsibility of all to strive for the fulfilment of the purposes and principles of the Charter.

26. The specific problems to be dealt with in our deliberations clearly point the way for us to follow. To their solution we must bend every effort and thus satisfy the desires of the world's people who, with growing hopefulness are watching the progress of this important session of the General Assembly.

27. Our century, especially in its recent decades, has witnessed vast and astounding changes in the international picture. Those changes have obeyed the impulse of dynamic and irresistible forces set in motion by circumstances that make our epoch unique in history. Perhaps at the very heart of this process of change lie the unprecedented technical advances which are growing in a geometrical progression. Its effects, however, have made themselves felt in the extremely important moral and psychological phenomena it has engendered. Mankind as a whole has reacted to the impact of the new concepts now placed in the service of ancient ideals, and today we witness their repercussions on the relations among States.

28. Two salient features stand out in this tide of change in the affairs of nations. One is the progress of co-operation among countries in all fields, especially those of economic and technical development, and the other is the relatively speedy fulfilment of the lofty principle of self-determination, which tolls the knell of the colonial system. Both these are prime movers in man's evolution towards the higher reaches of his destiny, reaches whose grandeur can only be glimpsed today.

29. There is no doubt that the spirit of international solidarity which is the hallmark of our time has evolved through economic and technical co-operation, and indicates the realization, on the part of the more advanced countries, of the responsibility incumbent upon them in the common task. To deny this would be unfair, but perhaps it would be even worse to overlook the shortcomings and flaws which have marred the programmes put into operation, particularly in the post-war period. These plans have, to a certain extent, proved unable to provide adequate solutions to the problems of development, and the tangible result is that no way has been found to prevent me steady widening of the gap, due to the difference m the degree of control over the means of production, that separates the developed from the more backward nations.

30. What economists call the "demonstration effect" has deep and upsetting social repercussions and serves to reduce mutual understanding among nations. Thus, there is a feeling of impatience and unrest among the great masses of the world, a feeling which will not allow them to accept long-range formulas or delayed solutions. Hence, a new responsibility rests on all Governments, and particularly on those of the highly developed countries, to find adequate ways of solving these problems. These countries are not unaware of the influence exercised by their economic policies on the rest of the world, nor how far we still are from the goals unanimously set at the sixteenth session of the General Assembly.

31. That sense of urgency signifies that we have passed the stage of diagnosis and that what is required today is vigorous international action. The United Nations recognized this when it inaugurated its programmes for the Development Decade, but we cannot hide our concern at the fact that, while almost one third of the Decade has elapsed, we still have not progressed beyond the organizational and preparatory period either on a regional or on the world level. We cannot forget that under-development means hunger, ignorance, lack of decent dwellings, disease and suffering for millions of human beings whom it is our duty to help.

32. I am not trying to place the responsibility on some and to exempt others. The analytical studies show that a large part of the effort must come from the under-developed countries themselves. It is for them to forge that spirit of national enterprise, of order and stability, which alone will permit them to attain their economic goals. The vigour of these countries will manifest itself in the requisite preparatory work, and success will crown those which are able to carry it out successfully. Nothing lasting can be built save on the firm foundations of a country's own efforts. My country does not believe that the required co-operation means maintaining economies in permanent dependence, for such aid would be fictitious and destructive of the national spirit. But a nation's efforts must be carried out in circumstances in which they can be successful; hence it must be understood once and for all that the present international trade structure must be altered.

33. The structural changes which we advocate correspond to a new concept of international division of labour. This will allow the less developed countries to lay new economic foundations and promote their industrialization, so that they will be able to supply increasing quantities of manufactured and semi-manufactured goods to the world market. This new concept is based on a more equitable interpretation of the principle of reciprocity than hitherto. Remunerative and stable prices for basic commodities must obviously be guaranteed, and to that end quantitative tariff restrictions must be eliminated and the policy of subsidies gradually done away with. Instead, perfectly feasible economic adjustments can be made to protect the more exposed sectors in the industrialized countries. Furthermore, obstacles to trade among all areas of the world must also be removed.

34. There is no doubt that from this point of view the forthcoming United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is of decisive importance. It is for this reason that Argentina strongly supports it; we do not wish it to be a mere forum for an exchange of opinions, but a new and eminently serviceable framework within which the basic problems of trade can be considered and solved. It would be desirable therefore —and my country has repeatedly stressed this— that the decisions taken by the Conference should be based on consent and conciliation rather than on simple majority votes, for only in that atmosphere will present restrictions be eliminated.

35. We are entering into a period of decisive importance, since 1964 will witness not only the Conference to which I have just referred, but also important discussions and agreements already planned for. The "Kennedy negotiations" on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the reconstruction of the British market for agricultural products, the agrarian policy of the European Economic Community and the possibility of a world organization of markets —which last plan still has too many unknown factors— are all events of major significance.

36. There is no telling how disastrous the consequences of failure would be, at a time we consider to be as vital as the present, and we do not hesitate to say so in this Assembly, the most universal forum that exists for the consideration of problems so deeply affecting the world community. This Assembly is the witness to the fact that we live in a world where economic solidarity is not achieving its objectives, and is losing ground because of the gradual limitations placed upon plans for financial assistance and because of the existence of distorted and selfish trade structures. The events which are to take place during the forthcoming year will determine to a large extent whether or not the unforeseeable disastrous consequences I have mentioned are produced.

37. The other distinctive feature of our time, to which I have already referred, is the notable phenomenon of the attainment of independence by the new States which are now making their valuable contribution to the work of this Organization. This new blood which in the past few years has been injected into the United Nations has given it that universality which is so necessary if it is to be truly representative of the world community of nations.

38. Argentina has always been a stout defender of the principle of self-determination of peoples, which is the heart and soul of the process of independence taking place in recent times. It has welcomed joyfully the friendly countries of Africa, Asia and our own continent which now sit among us in the conclave of sovereign States. We believe that this age of freedom in which we are living will put an end to colonialism in all its forms and manifestations, even in the case of small territories. Thus we regard the occupation of the Malvinas Islands, a crude violation of our sovereignty originally perpetrated during the period of imperialist expansion, when our own country was in the early stages of its independence, as a phenomenon which should not continue, in the interest of mutual understanding and friendship between two nations which are linked by many ties. The anachronistic presence of the United Kingdom in these islands, which are very sparsely populated, is pointless. We hope that our friend of so many years standing, which has acted so fairly in other parts of the world, will make yet another magnanimous gesture in this very special case.

39. Argentina realizes that the principle of self- determination laid down in the Charter must be considered in the context in which the right is to be exercised; i.e., there are factors which might limit its range when other principles, such as that of the territorial integrity of a State, or the special situation of disputed territories call for careful examination. Thus we think that the principle cannot be applied indiscriminately to situations where a territory has been separated by force from an independent State without any subsequent international agreement legalizing this de facto situation, and most especially when the indigenous population has been dispersed and groups of colonists who are nationals of the occupying Power have settled in the territory. For instance, if the principle of self-determination was indiscriminately applied to very sparsely populated territories, the destiny of those territories would be placed in the hands of a very small group of settlers who had established themselves there by force in contravention of the most elementary principles of international law, and the principle of self-determination would then be used as a screen to legalize a transfer of sovereignty under the protection of the United Nations. Nor do we believe that the principle of self-determination would be wholly applicable in a situation where the personality of a nation had not been respected and methods of penetration destructive of genuine independence had been used.

40. My country will continue to work for the universal application of human rights, a signal achievement of the United Nations and of the regional organizations. One of the most hateful blots on human relations, an obstruction which the international community has thus far been unable to remove, is racial discrimination, whatever its type or form. This is the reason why we are concerned when we see that in some parts of the world there is continued violation of this fundamental human right to equal treatment. We can do no less than reiterate our regret at this circumstance and, through the intermediary of the General Assembly, urge that this state of affairs should cease as soon as possible. On the other hand, in all fairness, we shall be no less emphatic in our sincere praise for Governments which are making genuine and vigorous efforts to abolish racial discrimination.

41. The United Nations has now been in existence for eighteen years. This session of the Assembly looks very different from the sessions of some years back. Certain reforms are urgently needed, including an expansion of the membership of certain United Nations organs, so that universal representation, one of the Organization's guiding principles, may be achieved. The Latin American States proposed such a step some time ago, but hitherto the problem raised has not been settled despite the fact that the steady increase in the number of Members has made it even more pressing.

42. In this connexion, I cannot refrain from referring to our regional organization, the Organization of American States which, in its own sphere, has been steadily endeavouring to put into effect the purposes and principles of the Charter and those of the Americas.

43. One constant feature in my country's international life is the strengthening of its ties with the sister republics of America. Above all, we claim for Latin America the role which is its due in the great world debates and we recognize the need to close our ranks in order to achieve the co-ordinated action which is the best means of attaining that universal welfare which is one of the purposes of our Organization. We cannot forget that Latin America has been the cradle of great principles of international political life, some of which have achieved the status of rules of international law. Our America must live up to its historic heritage and renew its endeavours to promote coexistence among nations. My country will spare no effort to support the action of the Organization of American States as a natural source of measures applicable to our continent, because we believe that it is with the framework of that body that the far-reaching aims expressed in its charter can be achieved.

44. As matters stand in the world today, it is more necessary than ever for us to unite in joint action. All Members of the United Nations should make their contribution to ensure that good sense shall govern the world, taking advantage of the present unusually favourable climate of international relations.

45. I do not want to be guilty of unfounded optimism; reality will always damp any excessive enthusiasm. But it is true that in the world today there is a relaxation of tension which should encourage us to persevere on our course. The conclusion of the nuclear test ban treaty, which my country signed is a first step and a sign that the great dialogue has begun. We think that the arms race is only the outward sign of deeply hidden motives, at the root of which lie fear and distrust. If those are overcome, the apparently impossible will be achieved; the Geneva talks may lead to that ideal situation of general disarmament under effective international control which Argentina has so fervently advocated. All of us, whether Members of the United Nations or not, must assume responsibility for the success of this first step, so that we may avoid any possibility of the world's so much as thinking of the use of nuclear weapons.

46. In concluding this statement on behalf of Argentina, I should like to appeal to the high humanitarian ideals and the goodwill of the men upon whose shoulders lies the heavy responsibility of this task. May the hope of their peoples guide them in the maze of diplomatic negotiations, so that the General Assembly at its succeeding sessions may carry out its work in an atmosphere of peace and mutual understanding, in the certainty that promises and undertakings will be fulfilled, and in that spirit of comradeship, not to say utopianism, that presided at the birth of the United Nations at a time when the last echoes of the great disaster, whose repetition we were anxious to avoid, had not yet died away.
