This is the first regular session of the General Assembly which Kuwait is honoured to attend after having been accepted as a Member of the World Organization at the last special session of the General Assembly [1203rd meeting], I want, first of all, to express my sincere appreciation for the privilege of again addressing the General Assembly of the United Nations in the name of the Government and people of Kuwait. This is a happy occasion which will go down in the history of my country as an important milestone on the road to progress which Kuwait is determined to pursue.
102.	Mr. President, permit me to congratulate you in the name of my delegation and my Government on your unanimous election to preside over our deliberations. Your able leadership has been demonstrated in the Security Council and in other activities of the United Nations. May I also be permitted to pay a tribute of high regard to your predecessor in this chair. The name of Mr. Muhammad Zafrulla Khan has become affectionately associated in our minds with the proceedings of the last special session of the General Assembly, at which Kuwait was admitted to membership of the United Nations, Finally, I would be remiss in my duty if I were not to express my sincere appreciation of the statesmanship of U Thant, our Secretary-General.
103.	This world Organization is becoming more and more truly representative of the vast majority of the nations, and consequently increasingly effective in the attainment of the lofty objectives of the Charter. My delegation would express the hope that its institutions will soon reflect a proportionate and well- balanced representation of the different areas of the world.
104.	As you mentioned in your opening address, Mr. President [1206th meeting], it is indeed a circumstance of happy augury that the present session of the General Assembly is held at a period when, for the first time after the end of the Second World War, genuine hopeful signs of lasting peace on earth are appearing on the horizon. Some weeks ago, a treaty was signed in Moscow placing a partial ban on nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water. Kuwait readily joined the vast majority of the nations of the world by adding its signature to that historic document. It is to be hoped that this is merely the first step towards a complete ban on the testing of nuclear weapons, which in turn will ultimately lead to total nuclear disarmament.
105.	It is high time to stop the cold war between the nations of East and West. It is high time to stop the arms race, that race which constitutes such a heavy drain on national resources and prevents their utilization for man's well-being and happiness.
106.	The prompt and almost unanimously favourable response of the nations of the world, large and small, to this limited test ban treaty is conclusive evidence which should convince every thinking and conscientious human being on our planet that the peoples of the world have had enough of war. This is especially true because of the grievous loss of life and treasure and the untold misery which humanity has suffered in the last two world wars. It is conclusive evidence that what the peoples of the world aspire to and cherish above all is peace, security and freedom from fear. It is to be hoped that this strong world opinion which condemns recourse to war as an instrument of policy would lead all nations —those who are and those who are not yet Members of the United Nations— to abandon any narrow views concerning the alleged necessity of nuclear tests for national security.
107.	While nuclear weapons constitute the most dangerous threat to peace, to human life and wellbeing, there are yet other factors which are capable of disturbing stability in various parts of the world and of exposing its inhabitants to serious anxieties and great dangers. Among these factors are the vestiges of colonial policies which are a thing of the past, but which some nations continue to pursue nevertheless in certain areas, more especially in Africa. The deplorable behaviour of Portugal naturally comes to mind in this context. The suffering, misery and inhuman persecution in Angola, Mozambique, and Portuguese Guinea are blatant transgressions against the principle of self-determination and the Declaration of Human Rights which can no longer be tolerated.
108.	Kuwait has, on more than one occasion, expressed its full approval of the resolution of the United Nations [1514 (XV)] recognizing the necessity of granting independence to all nations who still groan under the yoke of colonialism. I refer to the resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 14 December 1960. Kuwait avails itself of this opportunity to confirm its policy of giving its support to these nations in the struggle for their natural right to self- determination. Kuwait would also like to express from this rostrum its hope that the General Assembly will take the practical steps necessary to implement this resolution and give effective help to these nations in order to enable them to realize their legitimate aspirations. We believe that this is the only way to avoid the dangerous clashes which are now disturbing the peace and security of the world.
109.	Another unhappy feature of the present situation also imperils world peace and security. I refer to the ruthless policy of racial discrimination and savage persecution practised by the Government of South Africa against the vast majority of its original population and that of the territory of Southwest Africa now under its trusteeship. This is done under the hateful name of apartheid. Against the consensus of world opinion and in flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Declaration of Human Rights, the Union of South Africa continues to pursue its inhuman policy. This Assembly has spared no effort and has exhausted all patience trying to convince the Government of that State to change its deplorable course. But all this has hitherto been in vain. The time has now come to consider appropriate enforcement measures which will put an end to this human tragedy.
110.	Kuwait's strong feeling against apartheid is inspired by the unanimous sentiment of its people, who firmly believe in universal brotherhood and who are dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. These lofty principles are reflected in Kuwait's Constitution which bans any discrimination based on race, colour or creed. In response to the resolutions of the United Nations condemning apartheid, Kuwait wishes to declare in this session of the General Assembly that it has decided to sever economic relations with the Union of South Africa. These relations are worth several million dollars, and they constitute the only ties which now exist between that State and Kuwait. My Government does this because it shares the anxiety of the Special Committee over the opposition of the Union of South Africa to the resolution of the world Organization. This opposition is not merely academic. It is also a practical challenge which is apparent in the action recently taken by the Union of South Africa in tightening the stringency of its arbitrary and oppressive measures.
111.	If, out of sheer consideration for humanity, Kuwait raises its voice from this rostrum in order to plead for justice and freedom for nations who are remote from its territory, so much more is Kuwait naturally concerned at a tragedy which is much nearer home. I refer to the sad plight and the immeasurable injustice under which the Arab people of Palestine have been living for the last fifteen years. Strong ties of unity of origin, geography, tradition and culture bind Kuwait to the Arab people of Palestine, who continue to vegetate in untold misery, privation and neglect. They were driven out of their homes and evicted from their homeland for which they will accept no substitute and to which they are entitled to return. As I stated in the address I made in the special session of the General Assembly [1203rd meeting] on the occasion of the admission of Kuwait to membership of the United Nations, and as I want to confirm again today, the mere lapse of time does not deprive the people of Palestine of their legitimate rights to an honourable return to a country which is their own. May I add that the forcible dispossession of a nation, the substitution of another nation on its soil and the creation of an alien State in Arab territory on the ruins of the homes of its legitimate Arab owners, is in evident conflict with the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This constitutes a constant threat to the peace of the Arab World particularly and to the peace of the entire world in general. A fait accompli can never be a stable foundation for peace. Neither can the condoning of an injustice be a stable foundation for a just order. This is as true of the Palestine question as it is of any other world problem. If the history of nations provides us with reliable guidance, and if the experience of the past illuminates our vision of the future, then history teaches us that sooner or later nations will rise to seek redress of the wrongs and injustices they have been suffering under a fait accompli. So permit me once more in the name of a peace-loving nation to beseech you not to ignore the fire which is smouldering beneath the ashes in Palestine. It is constantly fed by the privations, suffering and resentment of one million displaced Arabs who are determined to return to their homeland. Indifference and apathy will not quench the fire which one day may flare up and endanger world peace. Justice and a humane attitude towards the catastrophe of Palestine is the only remedy.
112.	If these anomalous political situations in the different parts of the world I have described constitute infringements of the Charter of the United Nations and are consequently a constant threat to peace, the unsatisfactory social conditions and the economic strains and stresses they engender in various areas in Africa, Asia and Latin America are yet another potential source of danger. Millions of human beings live in poverty and destitution. Like peace, social justice is indivisible. We are directly and collectively responsible for our less-favoured fellow men. Therefore, it is the duty of the more fortunate nations, within the limits of their potentialities, to help the needy peoples of developing areas.
113.	In its previous sessions, the General Assembly discussed the aid which should be given to developing nations. Due to certain political considerations, which have been the object of careful study, the conclusion was reached that the most sound and effective aid was that extended through the United Nations.
114.	At the seventeenth session of the Assembly it was decided to establish a United Nations capital development fund [resolution 1826 (XVII)] in order to provide part of the capital which is initially needed for basic economic reconstruction in developing countries,
115.	As you are aware, my country has established a special fund for Arab economic development. This is in addition to Kuwait's contribution to different international development programmes.
116.	But it is not financial aid alone which counts in economic development. Kuwait realizes its own indebtedness to modern science and technology. Our Constitution has made it a function of the State to encourage scientific research. My delegation would like to express the wish that a greater measure of coordinated endeavours under the United Nations should be exerted by the developed nations to bring the benefits of scientific research to the developing nations. May I refer in this connexion to Kuwait's effort to repay part of what it owes to modern science by providing the necessary funds which have enabled thousands of young men in sister countries to pursue their scientific and technical training. Kuwait has likewise granted a large number of scholarships to various countries in Africa.
117.	On its admission as a Member of the United Nations, my country declared that it adopted a policy of positive neutrality and non-alignment. It expressed its attachment to the Arab nation's objectives of liberty, unity and social justice. Kuwait now wishes again to reaffirm its faith in, and support of, this policy which it considers as a constructive and beneficial factor for the Arab Nation and for the whole world.
118.	The United Nations is undoubtedly the bright hope of the world today. Let us therefore rise to the high level of the ideals of international co-operation for which it stands. Let the strong and rich nations extend to the weak and poor nations their assistance and co-operation on the basis of mutual respect and goodwill. This will redound to the benefit, not only of the developing nations, but of all the peoples of the world.
119.	Let us give a greater measure of co-operation to make the United Nations more effective in the attainment of its objectives. Let us banish colonialism, racial discrimination, religious intolerance and all the forms of social and economic injustice and exploitation. Let us eradicate the causes of war and discontent and fight poverty, ignorance and disease wherever they are to be found.
120.	In this manner, this world Organization will be able to realize man's most cherished hopes of peace, justice and prosperity.
