My presence at this eighteenth session of the General Assembly has been prompted not only by the compelling importance of the subjects on the agenda but also by my attachment to and respect for this Assembly, the close ties which I have established here and my desire to renew contact with numerous friends.

2. I am therefore happy today, speaking on behalf of Libya, to present our compliments to the Assembly and again to express to the representatives present here, with whom I have always enjoyed the closest relations, my warmest and most cordial feelings. The friendly understanding that has been established among the representatives, the fruitful habits of co-operation which have developed among them and their esteem for one another all strengthen their awareness of belonging to a great international family and effectively contribute to harmony and understanding among the countries they represent.

3. I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President, for having merited the great confidence which the Assembly has placed in you by choosing you to guide the work of this session, and to express my most sincere feelings of cordiality towards your noble country and all the peoples of Latin America, who have at all times supported this Organization and its Charter and defended its principles. Allow me to wish you complete success in your important task so that this session, under your chairmanship, may achieve the best possible results.

4. I also wish to express my greatest admiration for your predecessor, Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, and to pay a tribute to his political wisdom, his exceptional qualifications and his great firmness, which enabled him to discharge the difficult duties of the office of President so admirably and contributed greatly to the success of the last session.

5. It is with great hope that we welcome the easing of tension among the atomic Powers as a result of the agreement between the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the partial suspension of nuclear tests. We have been happy to note the joy and enthusiasm displayed on this occasion by all peace-loving nations. Their eagerness to accede to this Agreement, which the Libyan Government was one of the first to sign, is eloquent proof of their determination to work for the elimination of the obstacles to general and complete disarmament for the sake of all mankind. It also reveals their sincere hope that despite the difficulties which still exist as a result of racial and ideological prejudices, the unceasing co-operation of all the forces striving for greater understanding will lead the world to that stability and peace to which all peoples ardently aspire.

6. The task pursued by the United Nations in promoting equality among the peoples of the earth and in combating discrimination and prejudice, which are contrary to harmony among peoples, faithfully reflects the deepest aspirations of the hearts and minds of men.

7. The Libyan delegation is particularly happy that undeniable progress has been made in the gradual attainment of these objectives. There is no lack of recent examples of constructive United Nations action, particularly in the solution of the questions of Algeria, Cuba, the Congo and West Irian. There can be no doubt that at the time of the very serious Cuban crisis in October 1962 the prompt action taken by the Secretary- General, the immediate convening of the Security Council and the response to the appeals made by all mankind at the most critical moments played a crucial role in the preservation of world peace. That successful solution is striking proof of the effectiveness of the United Nations and of the prestige and authority which it has acquired as a result of the firm, speedy and appropriate action it has taken for the solution of international crises.

8. Imbued with unshakable faith in the high principles and noble ideals of the United Nations, Libya wishes again to express its determination to give full support to this Organization and to uphold the Charter in every way within its power. In solemnly pledging to implement the resolutions and recommendations of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace and security, Libya sincerely hopes that all Member States will show increased confidence in the Organization so that the atmosphere of loyal co-operation so necessary for the attainment of common goals can be achieved.

9. Having expressed our keen satisfaction with the positive results achieved by the United Nations, we cannot fail to observe that the current relaxation of international tension is not sufficient to dispel the feeling that world peace and security are constantly threatened by other International problems of extreme gravity.

10. It is a particularly painful duty, though an imperative one, for the Libyan delegation to refer once again to the Palestine question, which embodies a serious threat to the stability and security of the Middle East. During the past fourteen sessions this Assembly has witnessed a struggle between justice and injustice, the side of injustice defending aggression and, aided by the passage of time, seeking to cloak it with a mantle of legitimacy. It is well known that in this way the principles proclaimed by the United Nations Charter and the resolutions on the subject adopted by the General Assembly at previous sessions have been completely ignored. The unspeakable manner in which the forces guilty of aggression against the Palestinian nation have defied the authority of this Organization by their stubborn refusal to carry out its resolutions has created a tragic situation which will ever be remembered by mankind and will work to the detriment of the United Nations and to the confidence which it should inspire.

11. The Libyan delegation refuses to believe that fourteen years of subterfuge, trickery and distortion of the truth can induce this Organization to allow the final curtain to fall on the Palestine cause.

12. The United Nations cannot lull its conscience by the self-satisfying gesture that it is giving material assistance to a disaster-stricken people, for no matter how useful that assistance may be, it does not strike at the root of the tragedy. The Palestine question is primarily a national cause that falls logically within the framework of the liquidation of colonialism, the principle of which has been proclaimed in the historic resolutions adopted by the United Nations. The refugee problem is only one of the consequences of this tragedy, and although the assistance to refugees is financed at present by voluntary contributions of Member States, it is in our opinion an obligation forming part of the responsibilities assumed by the United Nations.

13. Resolution 194 (HI) adopted by the General Assembly on 11 December 1948 at its third session is still the basic text which expresses most clearly the objectives to be attained and the line of conduct to be followed. The right of Palestine refugees of repatriation is unreservedly recognized as is their right to compensation for the assets and properties from them, if they prefer not to return to their homes. It is also recognized that the refugees must be allowed a choice, free from any pressure or duress, between repatriation and compensation.

14. The Libyan delegation accordingly believes that the Palestine refugees should be offered such a choice without delay. It considers moreover that, pending a final solution, effective arrangements should be made to safeguard the property of the refugees and to collect the considerable revenues accruing from it.

15. By its very nature, the Palestine question unquestionably warrants a review by the United Nations. It requires an equitable solution which will redress injustice, enable right to triumph and satisfy the legitimate aspirations of the people of Palestine, who have been sorely tried by the buffetings of fate.

16. The Government of the Kingdom of Libya is fully convinced that the maintenance of peace in the Middle East calls for firm and prompt action at the international level to ensure that the United Nations resolutions concerning the Palestine question will be carried out.

17. The objective annals of history, in their indifference to the political forces of today, will not fail to record that the Arabs of Palestine, the original inhabitants of that area, were expelled from their own country and subjected to the most atrocious forms of injustice, violence, discrimination and unjust laws. This state of affairs, characterized by the dispersion on a massive scale of the indigenous inhabitants, the use of terrorist methods and utter disregard for the sacred rights of national or private property, constitutes a critical phase of the utmost gravity in the history of mankind.

18. At a time when the aggression against the Arab nation in Palestine constantly spreads out into the neighbouring Arab countries, as is evident from incidents in the recent and more distant past which have been brought before the United Nations, it is extremely painful to note that certain great Powers accept the injustice in Palestine on the pretext of maintaining a balance of power in the Middle East. In the view of the Libyan delegation, the only explanation for this obvious misrepresentation of the facts is that the great Powers have allowed themselves to be hoodwinked by the manoeuvres and pressures of international Zionism. How else can one explain the argument that there should be a balance of power between the adventurers who succeeded, at a moment when the world's attention was diverted, in establishing themselves in Palestine, and the Arab peoples, whose legitimate right cannot be contested even by the most accomplished sophists?

19. The people of Palestine, faithful and impassioned, will never resign themselves to the loss of the land of their ancestors. In the whole Arab world, the Palestine question is the rallying point of an intense movement of solidarity and faith. The only solution for preventing the fires which are smouldering in that region from again threatening the peace is the prompt implementation of the resolutions long ago adopted by the United Nations. If this Organization has not hitherto possessed the necessary means for overcoming the opposition it has encountered from various quarters, its brilliant achievements of the past year and the prestige it has gained from them are enough now to give it the boldness and the authority which are needed to impose a just and human solution in Palestine. In so doing it will increase its merit in the service of peace in the same measure that it would risk forfeiting its justly earned prestige by a failure to act which becomes increasingly more difficult to explain. That is why the Arab nations, and particularly Libya, place the greatest hope in the action which they expect this Organization to take without delay.

20. Among the questions which understandably cause us concern is the tragic situation of the people of Oman, who are struggling for the attainment of their legitimate aspirations to independence and to shake off the crushing yoke which imperialist interference has placed on their shoulders. The Libyan delegation is again compelled to condemn most categorically the methods of violence by which all forms of expression are being suppressed in Oman and its people prevented from attaining their national aspirations. It has no doubt that the Arab people of Oman will eventually emerge victorious from this unequal struggle, since the inevitable outcome of the struggle of the oppressed peoples will sooner or later be freedom and independence.

21. The Libyan delegation, while appealing to the world conscience to come to the aid of this just cause, again urges the General Assembly to use its good offices during the present session in order to find an equitable solution that will ensure for the people of Oman the right to self-determination in accordance with their national aspirations.

22. In the African continent, we still see many forms of injustice, domination and oppression. The peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea are subjected to the greatest hardships under regimes of oppression and have not thus far benefited from any of the United Nations resolutions on the elimination of colonialism.

23. Libya is following with great concern the extremely critical situation in Angola, which continues to deteriorate from day today and constitutes a serious threat to peace in the African continent. Prompted by feelings of brotherly sympathy and solidarity for the Angolan people, Libya declares its total support for the heroic struggle of that kindred nation. The colonialist forces have negated all moral values in order to impose their domination. In a vain effort to crush nationalist resistance and to repress the expression of the most legitimate feelings, they have plunged the country into a reign of terror. From all parts of the continent the voices of the African peoples rise with indignation to demand independence for the valorous people of Angola within the framework of the principles which the United Nations has called upon all nations to respect.

24. At the southern tip of the continent another African people is still suffering the most inhuman treatment, governed by a racialist minority which inflicts upon it the most atrocious forms of persecution and the most inhuman forms of moral and physical torture and enacts discriminatory laws to make the predominant African element an inferior class.

25. The policy of apartheid and racial discrimination adopted by the South African Government and directed against the people of African and Indo-Pakistan origin constitutes a crime which the human conscience cannot and must not accept. The obvious result of this senseless policy, which runs counter to the fundamental principles of human rights and the most elementary rules of morality, is a direct threat to peace in that part of Africa.

26. In view of the South African Government's scorn for the principles of the United Nations and its repeated refusal to carry out the resolutions adopted by this Organization, my delegation is convinced that all possible means of inducing the South African Government to change its policy have been exhausted and that the time has come to apply the provisions of Article 6 of the Charter, which refers to Member States that persistently violate the spirit and the principles of the Charter. The policy of apartheid and racial discrimination, the domination of the African majority by the minority and the denial of the most essential human rights make it mandatory for the United Nations to adopt such a measure to serve as an example and a lesson.

27. Out of a desire to express its indignation, the Libyan Government, acting in concert with the unanimous will of the great African family and in accordance with the resolutions adopted by this Organization at its seventeenth session, has broken off all relations with the Governments of South Africa and Portugal. It considers that in so doing it has faithfully interpreted the feelings of deep bitterness engendered in the Libyan people by the inhuman policies of these two Governments, which have not hesitated to violate the fundamental freedoms which all African people should enjoy in the land of their ancestors.

28. On the other hand, we wish to say how greatly we appreciate the resolution displayed by public opinion in the United States and by the Government of the United States in the efforts to give greater force to the principles of non-discrimination proclaimed in that country's Constitution,

29. Among the important items considered at the African Summit Conference and now before this Assembly is the question of Southern Rhodesia. In dealing with this item, which has already been the subject of several United Nations resolutions and was discussed by the Security Council at the beginning of this month, we are faced with the refusal of the Government responsible for this Territory to give effect to Article 73 of the Charter, which states that in the progressive transfer of powers to the people, due account must be taken of their national aspirations and their real interests. That Article also specifies that the administering Power must develop the means of expression available to the inhabitants so as to ensure their real and effective participation in the determination of their political future. It is extremely regrettable that the constitutional measures recently adopted by the administering Power will result in the transfer of powers to a European settler minority which does not exceed 6 per cent of the total population.

30. Libya associates itself with the other African countries as well as with all justice-loving nations in protesting vigorously against this denial of the principles underlying true democracy. It refers in particular to the resolution entitled "Decolonization" adopted by the Conference of Heads of African States at Addis Ababa last May, in which it declared that the forcible imposition of a settler government to control a dependent Territory is a flagrant violation of the inalienable rights of the legitimate inhabitants of the Territories concerned. The heads of African States also invited the colonial Powers not to transfer the powers and attributes of sovereignty to foreign minority governments imposed on African peoples by the use of force and under cover of racial legislation.

31. The Libyan delegation reiterates its support for and feeling of solidarity with the African people of Southern Rhodesia. It appeals to the States Members of the United Nations to give this question all the attention it deserves in view of the legitimate aspirations of the indigenous inhabitants of this Territory and in order to prevent the emergence of a situation similar to that now existing in South Africa with all its attendant dangers for international peace and security.

32. The Libyan delegation was extremely happy to welcome the emergence last May of the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, which reflects the basic, common aspirations of Africa. As a result of its heroic struggles and the efforts made by the United Nations, Africa has today succeeded in realizing its hopes and national aspirations, and only a few of its peoples still remain under foreign yoke.

33. By virtue of a policy based on a profound faith in the need for close co-operation between all the African countries, Libya has long sought to bring those countries nearer together. That is why Libya contributed actively to the preparations for the Summit Conference at Addis Ababa. It gave its full support to the Charter of African. Unity, the objectives of which are in perfect and natural harmony with the principles of the United Nations, since they cover such topics as the liquidation of colonialism, the struggle against racial discrimination and segregation, the reduction of conventional armaments, the prohibiting of nuclear tests and the production of atomic weapons, an appeal for the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, and economic and cultural co-operation.

34. Libya welcomed with immense satisfaction the historic Declaration on the granting of independence of all peoples under foreign domination and the final elimination of colonialism. This Declaration, adopted on the praiseworthy initiative of the Soviet Union, is one of the noblest acts recorded in the annals of the United Nations in support of legitimate causes, and we are extremely proud of it and honoured by it.

35. In the course of previous sessions the Libyan delegation has often expressed the hope that the United Nations will continue its laudable search for peaceful solutions to the problems confronting those countries or territories which have not yet achieved independence. While realizing that the results have thus far been very encouraging, the Libyan delegation appeals to the United Nations to spare no effort in tirelessly pursuing the aims of this historic Declaration in conformity with the desire of all people of self-determination. It would also like to congratulate wholeheartedly the United Nations organs which have been made responsible in various ways for ensuring the application of this Declaration. I make special mention of the Committee of Seventeen whose brilliant achievements deserve our deepest gratitude. We are not unaware of the enormous difficulties and serious obstacles which the Committee must face in the fulfilment of its mission. We convey to it our complete sympathy and appreciation and wish it the fullest possible success.

36. We remain acutely concerned about possible developments in those countries divided by war or its aftermath, such as Germany and Korea. We are convinced that it is neither fair nor wise to withhold from peoples the right to express their wishes in full freedom and that the use of force for the repression of this right has always engendered human tragedies and brought on threats to peace. We fervently hope that direct talks will continue between the Powers concerned in order that a realistic solution may be achieved. We hope that the United Nations will be able to play a constructive role by offering its help for the purpose of reconciling the divergent points of view.

37. The recent events in South-East Asia have added a new problem to the heavy burden of responsibilities assumed by the United Nations. Libya, which has always upheld the principle of respect for religious beliefs and freedom of worship, associates itself with those countries which have already asked this Assembly to take speedy and effective measures to put an end to all religious persecution or discrimination and to restore fundamental freedoms. With regard to the situation in Laos, we are extremely sorry that difficulties are being encountered in applying the agreement which was reached. We most sincerely trust that the obstacles on the road to peace and harmony in that country will be removed.

38. I should now like to deal with one of the most important problems confronting the peoples of the entire world, namely, the achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control. Libya is extremely concerned about the arms race in all its forms and is following with great hopes, keen interest and close attention the efforts being made by the United Nations to find workable solutions to this problem. The Libyan delegation would like to express the concern of its Government at the difficulties which have impeded the negotiations now being conducted by the Committee of Eighteen. It hopes most sincerely that the great Powers will achieve practical results in this important field. The Libyan delegation, while voicing its profound satisfaction at the agreement reached by the three great Powers on a partial test-ban, sincerely hopes that all the nations concerned will, without hesitation or reservations, give their adherence or support to that treaty in order to strengthen the present encouraging trend and the promise it holds of banishing for ever the threat of war and reinforcing the foundations of a lasting peace.

39. The Libyan delegation hopes that the partial test- ban treaty will contribute to a final solution of the disarmament problem and the establishment of effective international control. Thus, mankind will at last be able to free itself from a deadening anxiety, avoid the dangers of destruction and annihilation and direct all its efforts towards building the peace that will inaugurate a new era in which atomic energy will be used solely for peaceful purposes. In the same spirit, the Libyan delegation considers that the immense achievements of man in the exploration of outer space should be used solely for the progress of mankind and the development of scientific knowledge within the framework of international co-operation.

40. Libya was particularly gratified that resolution 1710 (XVI) on the United Nations Development Decade stressed the utilization of resources released by disarmament for the purpose of economic and social development. Despite the persevering efforts of the United Nations to help the developing countries, the total financial resources allocated to them offer scant hope of quickly reducing the gap between them and the highly industrialized nations. The fantastic amount of money spent each year on weapons production or research is so great that even its partial conversion for purposes of development would open up the most dazzling prospects for the solution of a problem which remains disquieting for the future of international relations. That is why, at the last session, Libya welcomed with the keenest interest resolution 1837 (XVII) on the financing of development with the resources freed by disarmament, and why, at the present session, it hopes that further progress will be made towards this essential goal.

41. Libya appreciates that among the constructive proposals contained in the resolution on the Development Decade, priority was given to the need for highly qualified staff, and it is awaiting with the greatest interest the proposals prepared on this subject by the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination.

42. The Libyan delegation also hopes that the extremely interesting studies on the international flow of private capital will soon be followed by tangible developments.

43. With regard to commodity agreements, it has often been acknowledged that stabilization of the prices of raw materials and agricultural commodities is a basic objective and that the absence of such stabilization exposes the developing countries to losses of resources exceeding the total amount of the financial aid they receive from bilateral or multilateral sources. Libya therefore hopes that no effort will be spared to overcome the difficulties impeding the broadening of these commodity agreements and that substantial progress will be made in this field particularly as a result of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development now being prepared within the framework of the Decade.

44. Libya continues to be particularly interested in the progress of the activities of the Technical Assistance Board and the Special Fund. It has been pleased to note that the technical co-operation programmes administered by the United Nations in Africa doubled between 1960 and 1961 and doubled again between 1961 and 1962. It urges that the policy of regional and interregional decentralization should be continued as part of a trend that corresponds to the growing awareness by Africa of its unity.

45. Libya would like to take this opportunity to express once again to the United Nations its gratitude for the very appreciable services it has received since its independence in the field of technical assistance. This aid is particularly welcome at a time when our country's economic growth shows clear signs of accelerating in circumstances which encourage reasonable hopes.

46. Faced with the already rapid tempo of economic development, the Government and the administration must assume responsibilities which proved difficult to discharge under a decentralized system of government. While such a system was adapted to the circumstances surrounding Libya's independence, it no longer corresponded to the real wishes of the Libyan people. Thus, in April of this year it became possible to achieve the complete unification of the country in an atmosphere of general enthusiasm, and this event will undoubtedly constitute a historic phase of our country's progress.

47. This unification has paved the way for a whole series of legal and administrative reforms, one of the most important and at the same time one of the less spectacular being the current merger between the former federal administration and the former provincial administrations. Concurrently with this development, all the legal instruments for a co-ordinated economic and financial policy have been or are now being drawn up.

48. An initial development plan, representing a synthesis of economic and social objectives for the next five years, has been approved by the Parliament. An Act on credit and currency control which has already been passed will soon be followed by an Act instituting a modern fiscal system. Virtually all the essential social and economic sectors are covered by laws already adopted or under consideration which are designed to stimulate and co-ordinate their development. We hope —and I am sure that the United Nations, which has a special interest in Libya, fully shares our hopes— that these reforms will make it possible to raise the level of living of our people in an atmosphere of increasing stability and freedom.

49. The Libyan delegation feels that the following comments on the administrative problems of the Organization are called for.

50. In the first place, Libya hopes that all Member States will provide the United Nations with sufficient financial aid to enable it to meet the growing burden of its responsibilities. Libya, for its part, has responded favourably to the appeals of the Organization and intends to continue supporting it both financially and in all other ways.

51. The Libyan delegation regrets, on the other hand, that although a large number of independent countries have joined the Organization, the representation of Member States in the principal organs of the United Nations has not been sufficiently modified to take this situation into account. The Libyan delegation therefore addresses a sincere appeal to the United Nations to allocate to the new Members responsibilities equal to those of the older Members and, in particular, to give Africa, which now has thirty-two Member States in the Organization, a fair proportion of seats, in accordance with the principle of equitable geographical representation, in the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the specialized agencies.

52. Within the limits of its sovereignty, independence and dignity and in conformity with the high principles which govern its political life as well as with its traditions and its moral and national values, Libya has spared no effort to establish, with the Powers of both the West and the East, the most cordial relations based on mutual respect, co-operation and friendship.

53. Furthermore, Libya is continually strengthening its fraternal ties with the other countries of Africa within the framework of African unity and is cultivating very cordial relations with the Asian countries within the context of Afro-Asian solidarity.

54. Libya, as a result of Its geographical position and of a well-balanced and independent policy marked by a strong feeling of brotherhood with all the Arab countries, represents a link between the Maghreb and the eastern part of the Arab world and is continually working for a closer relationship with those countries within the Arab League.

55. Libya is gratified that these links of friendship reveal the harmony between its foreign policy and its total dedication to the principles of the United Nations Charter.

56. The Libyan delegation is very happy to convey the cordial greetings of Libya, its King, its Government and its people once again to the representatives of the Member States and to reiterate the assurances of its co-operation with the General Assembly. It will assuredly give the closest attention to the discussion of the various agenda items. In expressing to the Assembly its best wishes for the greatest possible success in its work, it fervently hopes that this session will be marked by a special effort at understanding among the Member States, in order to surmount all obstacles and work out fair solutions to international problems, in conformity with the aims of the Organization, for the purpose of preserving peace and building a better world where all nations will work together for the progress and the well-being of mankind.
