Mr. President, may I first of all extend to you the congratulations of the Moroccan delegation and my own congratulations upon your election to the Presidency of this session of the General Assembly. Your election to this important office is a just tribute to you and to your country.
118.	For many years the sessions of the General Assembly have been held in an atmosphere of tension and gold war fraught with great danger to mankind. This year the keynote of the eighteenth session so far has been relaxation and hope. My Government is happy to note this improvement in the international atmosphere. It sees in it the culmination of the untiring efforts of all peoples and of all men of good will. The debates of the present session will be characterized by this new spirit.
119.	The Moscow Treaty on the partial banning of nuclear tests will be important not only by virtue of the subject with which it deals, but also, and above all, because of the new prospects that it opens up. That is why my delegation wishes to express its deep satisfaction that the treaty has been concluded.
120.	The nuclear test ban, even if it is still limited, is particularly welcomed by my delegation, which as soon as Morocco became independent came to this very rostrum to protest against the nuclear explosions in the Sahara. His Majesty King Hass an II, too, declared in unequivocal terms, at the Belgrade Conference, that Morocco was opposed to such tests.
121.	The establishment of denuclearized geographical zones might in turn constitute a new stage on the way to disarmament. Ever since 1960 we have been calling for the denuclearization of Africa. In so doing we hoped to limit geographically the stockpiling and dissemination of nuclear weapons and to reduce the harmful effects of the pollution of the atmosphere and nuclear fall-out. Today it is the denuclearization of Latin America that is on our agenda and the Moroccan delegation will give its full support to that proposal.
122.	We must acknowledge that one of the regions where international tension is still as acute as ever is the Middle East, for the problem of Palestine continues to have the dramatic aspect which has characterized it from the outset. My country is deeply concerned about the alarming situation of the Arab people who have been expelled from Palestine. Israel, together with the Powers responsible for this situation, continues to disregard the state of destitution and poverty in which hundreds of thousands of Arabs live as stateless persons a few miles away from their native land. We deplore the fact that resolutions of the United Nations have remained a dead letter and that our Organization has done nothing to ensure their implementation. The countries which are leading the fight for justice and freedom can no longer remain indifferent to this tragic problem and we must endeavour here to find the means to restore the rights of the Arab people of Palestine.
123.	With regard to the question of Oman, we are glad that the General Committee of the General Assembly [154th meeting] recognized its colonial character by including it in the agenda of the Fourth Committee.
124.	The colonial problem is still liable to imperil the relaxation of tension which we have noted in international relations. Colonialism is in fact a permanent source of crisis between a few colonial Powers and the rest of mankind. One has only to analyse the positions of the States represented here in order to realize that the colonial problem gives rise to a confrontation between opposing sides which is no longer simply a matter of statements of position. Indeed, how can we remain indifferent when colonialism is still openly practised in Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea, South West Africa and other countries? Each day claims more victims in Africa and elsewhere. We cannot really envisage the establishment of a lasting peace without the total elimination of colonialism. We must therefore continue our efforts to ensure that the provisions of the Charter and in particular the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) on the elimination of colonialism are respected.
125.	Ever since it attained independence the Moroccan Government, faithful to the principles which guided it in its own struggle, has steadfastly supported the people who still live under foreign domination. Morocco is still giving its whole-hearted support both directly to the various national liberation movements and in the various organs of the United Nations, and recently in the important debates in the Security Council.
126.	Another cause of tension which we must endeavour to eradicate is the odious practice of racial discrimination. South Africa defies the international community by raising its racist doctrine to the level of a political dogma. The United Nations should spare no efforts to induce the South African Government to show greater respect for international moral values. The present session of the General Assembly will, we hope, adopt a declaration on racial discrimination on the lines of the declaration if adopted with regard to colonialism at its fifteenth session. My delegation will take part in the drafting of such a declaration and will support its adoption.
127.	The most important political event of our time will prove to be the accession of numerous countries to international sovereignty. But this political independence will remain fragile and precarious if it is not accompanied by economic liberation.
128.	In fact, in the countries which have recently attained independence, the economy, trade, infrastructure and even the administrative machinery were, with rare exceptions, in the hands of the colonizing Power and its nationals. As a result the newly independent countries are today called upon to make a long and difficult change, a laborious transformation of the structures left behind by the former administering Powers. They have to revise, reorganize and adapt everything to the needs of the people of the country, Since in the majority of cases there is a serious lack of cadres and of means, it has unfortunately been impossible to carry out those operations, with all the requisite urgency and efficiency.
129.	Aid from the developed countries can prove extremely useful, whether given direct or through international organs. We cannot but note, however, that in several cases the countries which are in a position to provide such aids try, by the expedient of investments and loans made on certain conditions, to limit in one way or another the independence of the young nations, in an effort to ensure the maintenance of their privileges.
130.	The structure of present-day international society reminds us of the national structure of certain European countries at the beginning of their own industrialization. While the privileged classes lived in opulence, the rest of the population lived in miserable and precarious conditions. The lack of understanding between the two classes resulted in a struggle which was often reflected in profound imbalance and violent conflict.
131.	The national realities of that time have now been transposed to the international plane, Indeed, it is the opposition between the "have" nations and the "have nots" which is likely to produce tension and conflict. Will the highly developed countries show more understanding in this respect than did the privileged classes of former days? The balance and stability in the developing world should inspire in them a conception of assistance which would eliminate mistrust and suspicion and make good will reign among States. In that way fruitful co-operation and feelings of solidarity which would guarantee peace and economy could be established between the members of the family of nations.
132.	In referring to the nuclear test ban and disarmament, we had in mind also the many and beneficial repercussions which they may have on the economic and social situation of the under-developed countries. It is generally agreed that military expenditure amounts to hundreds of thousands of millions of dollars every year. The great Powers have frequently affirmed that the savings effected by disarmament would be applied to peaceful undertakings and could, to a great extent, help to improve the living conditions of mankind as a whole.
133.	This year has been marked by an event of considerable importance —the creation of the Organization of African Unity at Addis Ababa. The birth of this organization is the culmination of many years of constant striving by all Africans to pool their potential in every sphere and to harmonize their political, economic and social action so that Africa may not remain in a position of inferiority.
134.	The unity of Africa is an objective the attainment of which will perhaps be preceded and prepared by regional groupings designed to provide solid foundations for it. For example, the countries of the Maghreb, which are united by ties that are as numerous as they are real, intend to harmonize, co-ordinate and even unify their capital equipment and industrialization plans. We realize that the unification of the Maghreb will undoubtedly give rise to great difficulties, but the will to succeed shown by the countries concerned is a guarantee of success.
135.	Our action for African unity and for the constitution of the Maghreb is not in any way at variance with our traditional diplomacy, which seeks cooperation with all States, to whatever group they may belong.
136.	As His Majesty King Hassan II has said: "This co-operation is not conceived as an attitude of systematic opposition to the ideas either of the East or of the West. There are certain valid and just positions on both sides and intellectual honesty and objectivity require us to accept such positions. This policy does not imply isolation or indifference to any section of mankind; rather it is a quest for and acceptance of all that is true and right in the sum total of human thought." Within the framework of this policy, my country is continuing its efforts to promote economic and social progress within its frontiers. It has set as its essential goal the achievement of social justice by a better distribution of the national income among the different strata of the population.
137.	In a recent address to the nation, His Majesty the King of Morocco declared: "We intend that Morocco's economy shall become above all a Moroccan economy and that our nationals shall be a position to control it." To this end the Moroccan Government has this year resumed direct control of electric power and railways, in order to be better able to guide economic expansion along the right lines. Thus the Moroccan State is gradually taking into its hands the key sectors of our economy, while encouraging the private sector to devote itself to other activities within the framework of flexible planning.
138.	Morocco is at present engaged in a very important operation: it has just embarked upon the first stage of agrarian reform, which is mainly concerned with what are known as land settlement schemes. "This agrarian reform," said His Majesty King Hassan H, "must from now onwards be carried out vigorously. It will result in a complete reshaping of the present agrarian structure by restrictions on the size of holdings, redistribution of the land for the benefit of the rural population, and economic growth in accordance with the provisions for our Constitution."
139.	This Constitution, which was approved by the Moroccan people on 7 December 1962, makes Morocco a constitutional, democratic and social monarchy. At the international level, the Constitution sets the achievement of the Greater Maghreb and of African unity as Morocco's objective, while at the national level it guarantees to all our citizens freedom of opinion, freedom of religion, freedom of expression in all its forms, freedom of assembly and association, and freedom to join any trade union or political organization of their choice. The reshaping of the country's political and social structure, in particular through the establishment of a Parliament, may raise some problems of adaptation, but Morocco is embarking upon this stage of democratizing its institutions with calm and resolution.
140.	The efforts made by individual States with international assistance must not blind us to the beneficent action in the development field carried out by international bodies, in particular the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
141.	In this connexion, we must pay a tribute to the work these organizations have accomplished in Morocco. I should like to express my Government's satisfaction to the personnel in charge of these organizations and to the experts, whose competence is matched only by their devotion to duty.
142.	I shall venture to quote a few examples of projects that have been carried out or are being carried out by the different international organizations: a training centre for civil aviation and meteorological staff in Morocco; an engineering school at Rabat; an agricultural research institute; a national institute for higher technical training at Casablanca, established with the combined assistance of the Special Fund and the International Labour Office; and an Institute of African Studies which will be opened at Tangier at the end of this year, thanks to the assistance of UNESCO.
143.	I should not like to end this short speech without referring to a project which is dear to my country —the Rif region development project. The aim of this project is to develop the whole basin and watersheds of the river Sebou, in particular by the construction of a series of dams designed both to control the flow of the river and its tributaries in order to avoid a recurrence of flooding and to make large-scale farming possible in the Gharbe region, the Ouergha Valley and the Fez-Meknes Plains. The Governing Council of the Special Fund, FAO and the Moroccan Government will finance the project, for which preliminary studies have been put in hand. The agricultural development expected from this project will undoubtedly have decisive effects on the agricultural and industrial development of the whole region and consequently on the country's economic expansion.
144.	Those, briefly, are some aspects of the work being done by Morocco with the help and the effective support of international organizations. Those organizations are certainly accomplishing a great deal in the developing countries, but we hope that the means at their disposal will be increased in order to enable them to meet the justifiable requests addressed to them by the various countries.
145.	We think, too, that some United Nations initiatives are major contributions to the development of the under-developed countries. This is true of the United Nations Development Decade and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development which is to be held in 1964.
146.	Nevertheless, in order that the developing countries may be able to play their proper part in the United Nations and make their voices heard, the necessary changes will have to be made in the United Nations Charter.
147.	Today the United Nations has over 110 Members. This considerable increase in membership has not, unfortunately, been accompanied by a parallel growth of its structures. The Organization has remained just as it was conceived by its founders. Now, however, we are confronted with new demands and new interests.
148.	The African States, which for the most part have only recently attained independence, think it necessary that a structural revision should be undertaken quickly and that they should be given a more equitable position in the various international organizations. Morocco, for its part, will continue to make a resolute effort in that direction.
149.	How can Africa participate effectively in the work of the United Nations for peace and progress and play the dynamic role to which it aspires in the international community if it is not given fair and equitable representation in the various organisations through a broadening of African representation, mainly in the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council? I should like to join my voice to all those which have already been heard here in support of the African demand that all the Powers concerned should understand this legitimate aspiration, which, after all, simply seeks to give our Organization a more realistic structure and to make our work more effective.
150.	The United Nations will thus have greater authority and more means whereby to accomplish its mission in the interest of peace and international co-operation.
151.	Morocco still has unsolved problems with other countries, particularly territorial and frontier problems. Ever since my country recovered its sovereignty and responsibility for its foreign affairs in 1956, it has not failed to bring up these problems. We have expressed formal reservations on these matters both to the countries concerned and within international organizations. We continue to believe that justice and wisdom will finally prevail. In our view, there is no problem for which a solution cannot be found by negotiation. As you know, Morocco has made this peaceful procedure a principle of its diplomacy to which it is sincerely attached,
152.	As regards the problem of the Moroccan territories which are still under Spanish administration, it is our firm hope that it will be resolved in the spirit of co-operation and good neighbourliness which characterizes our relations with our Spanish friends. In that connexion, we hope that the negotiations announced at Barajas at the time of the meeting between His Majesty King Hassan II and His Excellency Generalissimo Franco will open shortly and will lead to a happy solution of this problem. We hope that, thanks to the good intentions shown on both sides, it will be possible to overcome all the difficulties. Thus both sides will have made a contribution to the easing of international tension and helped to strengthen peace and understanding between nations.
153.	At the beginning of my speech I pointed out that the present session had opened in an atmosphere of relaxed tension in international relations. It is our hope that this new atmosphere will make itself felt more every day and that the great Powers which are engaged in an armaments race will now turn their gaze towards new horizons —those of peaceful co-operation.
154.	Of course, there will still be antagonisms between nations; differences of ideology, of systems of government, of economic and social conceptions. But these differences stimulate peaceful competition among different countries in the exclusive pursuit of their national interests and will undoubtedly lead to a constant improvement in the living conditions of the human race, and that, above all the divergencies, is the goal which all of us here are seeking.
