Allow me, first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you warmly on your election to the high post of President of the eighteenth session of the General Assembly.
51.	As many previous speakers have rightly observed, the eighteenth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations is starting its work in more favourable circumstances than the seventeenth session.
52.	As we are well aware, the previous session of the General Assembly was overshadowed by the very grave crisis in the Caribbean, which brought mankind to the brink of a thermo-nuclear catastrophe.
53.	The peaceful solution of this crisis, thanks to the well-considered and reasonable policy of the Government of the Soviet Union and thanks to the efforts of peace-loving forces, was an event of great international significance which took place in the period between the last and the present sessions of the General Assembly. In this connexion, our delegation would like to emphasize here the great importance, not only of the fact that this acute crisis was itself liquidated, but also and especially the importance of that spirit of compromise and reason which was displayed in the peaceful solution of the crisis. It is this spirit of constructive approach which has opened new avenues for the further positive encounter with other burning issues of international relations.
54.	It is with great gratification that we now make reference to another signal event. The conclusion of the Moscow Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water by the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom, and the accession by the overwhelming majority of States of the world to this Treaty represents an important step on the way to international "détente" and to the strengthening of world peace.
55.	The conclusion of this Treaty constitutes a new victory for the policy of peaceful coexistence, consistently pursued by the socialist countries, and a notable contribution to the improving of mutual trust and understanding among nations. What is noteworthy here is that States with differing social systems could overcome their differences and find a mutually acceptable solution to this international problem. This instance confirms the fact that in the presence of goodwill, States involved in differences can achieve success in the settlement of International disputes by way of negotiation. The acceptance of the nuclear test ban treaty by an increasing number of States testifies to the vitality of the principles of peaceful coexistence.
56.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic, whose foreign policy rests on the principles of peaceful coexistence, expressing the aspirations of the Mongolian people and realizing the importance of banning nuclear weapon tests, was among the first signatories to this Treaty, signing it on 8 August 1963 simultaneously in Moscow and in London.
57.	Our delegation is of the opinion that this Treaty does not remove the danger of a thermo-nuclear war, nor does it release mankind from the heavy burdens of an arms race. Nevertheless, we hall it as an initial step toward the positive solution of one of the most crucial problems of our time: the problem of disarmament.
58.	The Mongolian delegation, therefore, deems it appropriate that the present session of the General Assembly should approve in proper form the Moscow Treaty, which has been signed by the overwhelming majority of Member States of the United Nations, as the first step in the direction of total disarmament.
59.	In addition to the above-mentioned circumstances conducive to the lessening of international tension, I should like to recall a number of other events which were also of certain help to the creation of the atmosphere which prevails at this session. The achievement of understanding between the USSR and the United States on the establishment of a direct line of communications between Moscow and Washington [see A/ 5488, annex 1] and on the further steps of co-operation between these two countries in the field of peaceful exploration of outer space deserve special mention.
60.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic notes with satisfaction that peace-loving nations continue to bend their efforts within and without the United Nations toward the easing of international tension and the strengthening of mutual confidence among States.
61.	In this connexion we recall the efforts of the six non-aligned countries of Asia and Africa which made the well-known mediatory proposal with respect to the peaceful settlement of the border dispute between China and India.
62.	May we add at this juncture that we consider that peaceful negotiation between the parties concerned is the only correct means of solving any border dispute between States.
63.	Our delegation attaches great significance to the Summit Conference of Independent African States held at Addis Ababa in May 1963. This Conference played a definite role in consolidating the unity of the peoples of this great continent. If confirmed, moreover, the aspirations of its participants to improve the atmosphere of international relations and to bring about the positive solution of burning international issues such as the denuclearization of the African continent and the attainment, on a world scale, of general and complete disarmament.
64.	To consolidate the initial successes on the way to the improvement of the international atmosphere and to strengthening world peace is, we believe, a paramount task of the present session of the General Assembly.
65.	This task is especially momentous in the light of the fact that proponents of the cold war and foes of peace and the freedom of nations are making their attempts in different parts of the world to aggravate the international situation. We cite as a striking instance of this the piratical attacks of the Cuban counterrevolutionaries, aided and abetted by reactionary forces from outside, against the freedom and independence of the Republic of Cuba, whose heroic peoples have chosen their way to a brighter and happier life. Cuba does not threaten anyone. Cuba desires to live in peace and friendship with all neighbouring States on the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence. The interests of maintaining peace and security in this region of the Western hemisphere demand that the United States of America and other States should not interfere in the internal affairs of the Republic of Cuba and should observe international obligations of non-aggression against that country.
66.	The delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic shares the view expressed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, U Thant, in the introduction to his annual report on the work of the United Nations [A/5507/Add.l] that if the Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests is followed by agreement on other measures aimed at lessening international tension and establishing confidence among States, it may be the beginning of a new era of better understanding between nations and may create a more favourable international climate that would facilitate progress towards general and complete disarmament and the goal of stable international peace and security which remains the primary purpose of the United Nations.
67.	Having in view these noble ends, we believe that efforts should be renewed to reach agreement on the discontinuance of underground nuclear weapon tests in accordance with the explicitly expressed spirit of the Moscow Treaty. The reaching of such an accord would represent yet another step towards the achievement of agreement on general and complete disarmament —the cardinal problem of the present time. The creation of denuclearized zones in different parts of the world, and the conclusion of an international agreement preventing further dissemination of nuclear weapons would also promote the solution of this vital problem.
68.	The position of the Government of the Mongolian People's Republic with respect to the problem of general and complete disarmament was clearly expressed in the statements made by our delegations at previous General Assembly sessions. Our Government has firmly supported the proposals of the Soviet Union which provide for constructive measures for the implementation of general and complete disarmament. These proposals suggest that at the first stage of general and complete disarmament there should be the liquidation of nuclear weapons delivering vehicles coupled with the simultaneous dismantling of all foreign military bases and withdrawal of troops from foreign soil.
69.	In the view of the Mongolian delegation the step-by-step programme of disarmament proposed by the Soviet Union in its draft treaty on general and complete disarmament, as well as the additions and changes introduced at a later stage, are of a truly constructive nature and directed toward genuine implementation of general and complete disarmament.
70.	It is regrettable, however, to note that there is still no progress in the work of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament. The Western Powers continue to adhere to their old stand in the negotiations in this Committee. People throughout the world demand that the earliest possible concrete progress be made in the accomplishment of general and complete disarmament. Accordingly, our delegation gives its full support to the new proposal made at the present session by the delegation of the Soviet Union [1208th meeting] to convoke in the first quarter or the first half of 1964 a conference of the Member States of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament at the highest level. In our opinion such a meeting undoubtedly would greatly benefit the work of this Committee by paving the way towards composing mutually acceptable practical measures on disarmament, which is the main purpose of the Committee. The Soviet Government has expressed its readiness to agree to the retention by the Soviet Union and the United States of a limited number of missiles on their own territories, not only until the end of the second stage of disarmament but until the end of the third stage. This position taken by the Soviet Union deserves serious consideration.
71.	As we are all aware, the Government of the Soviet Union submitted recently a number of other proposals directed at further relaxation of international tension and the creation of a favourable climate for the attainment of the main goal: general and complete disarmament. In particular, it has proposed the conclusion of a non-aggression pact between member states of NATO and member states of the Warsaw Treaty Organization. This proposal is of far-reaching significance under the present circumstances obtaining in Europe, where troops of all the big nuclear Powers of the two military groupings face one another.
72.	Positive solution of this question, in our opinion, will in its turn create a better atmosphere for measures towards the freezing and eventual cutting of military budgets of States, the reduction of foreign troops stationed in West Germany and in the German Democratic Republic, the preventing of surprise attack and so on. Now the world is anxious to see how the Western Powers will respond to these new proposals of the Soviet Union,
73.	Our delegation hopes that the Western Powers, taking into account the existing realities of today's world and the interests of preserving peace and security of nations, will take positive steps towards bringing these proposals to a realization.
74.	However, judging from statements of leaders of Western Powers in general, and of the United States in particular, one would get the impression that they would prefer to discuss only measures aimed at preventing surprise attack, and to push the question of disarmament into the background. Such partial measures no doubt would promote some improvement in the international situation. However, our delegation would like to stress here that the people of all countries demand not partial agreements on limited problems but the implementation of general and complete disarmament, which is the only guarantee of lasting peace on earth.
75.	With your permission, Mr. President, I should like to comment briefly on another important problem, the positive solution of which will bring about a favourable atmosphere for preserving peace in Europe and the world over. This is the German question.
76.	The position of the socialist countries on this question proceeds from the recognition of the present realities obtaining in Europe: the existence of the two sovereign German States, namely, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany. Therefore, we strongly believe that the conclusion of a peace treaty with both German States and the solution of the West Berlin question on this basis would put an end to the vestiges of the Second World War in Europe and thus would help maintain peace and the security of nations. The ruling circles in Bonn, who pursue the aim of altering by force the border lines established after the Second World War and who attempt to assume the right to speak on behalf of the whole of Germany, obviously do not want to accept it. The revenge-seeking claims of the ruling circles of the Federal Republic of Germany, their policy of blocking the peaceful settlement of the German question and the provocative actions of the Federal Republic of Germany against the German Democratic Republic constitute one of the main sources of difficulties which aggravate international tension in Europe.
77.	The external policy of the Government of the German Democratic Republic is based on quite different principles. The unbending efforts of the German Democratic Republic, directed at the solution of the German question in the interests of the entire German people, at preserving peace and security in Europe and all over the world, strengthen its international prestige as a peace-loving socialist State adhering to the principles of the development of friendly co-operation between States.
78.	In this connexion our delegation notes with regret the discriminatory attitude towards the German Democratic Republic, which has been in evidence up to the present moment with respect to this nation's membership and attendance at international forums held under auspices of the United Nations and of its specialized agencies. This attitude has also been maintained with respect to the participation of the German Democratic Republic in' international treaties concluded through United Nations participation and we equally deplore it, since such abnormal acts in one way or another encourage those who are attempting to infringe upon the legitimate rights of this sovereign State. We consider that an end should be put to such an irregular practice which clearly runs counter to the principle of universality of the United Nations Charter.
79.	The disintegration of the colonial system is entering its final phase under the impact of the national liberation movement of the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America. More than four fifths of the peoples of Africa have broken the chains of their colonial slavery. At present, the heroic struggle of the people for national liberation is flaring up with fresh strength in the last remaining colonies —in Angola, so-called Portuguese Guinea, Mozambique, both Rhodesias, Nyasaland and other colonial territories and possessions. The liberation movement of the Latin American people against foreign imperialist domination is gaining momentum.
80.	The Mongolian people, resolutely condemning colonialism in all its forms and manifestations, together with all peace-loving forces, consistently stand for the most speedy elimination of the disgraceful colonial system. As we indicated before, we attach great importance to the decisions reached at the Summit Conference of Independent African States in Addis Ababa. The Conference adopted measures for rendering assistance and support to the African people still suffering under colonial oppression. In this context, the Conference itself represents a new stage in the national liberation movement of the people of this continent.
81.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic insists on strict implementation of the decisions of the General Assembly and other United Nations organs which condemn the policy of apartheid of the racist regime of the South African Republic and which provide for application of political, economic and other sanctions against that regime. We also support the demand of the African countries that similar sanctions be applied against the Government of Portugal, which persistently opposes granting independence to its colonies in Africa and carries on brutal reprisals against the indigenous population.
82.	Three years have elapsed since the General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, but the shameful colonial system has yet not been obliterated from the surface of the earth. Today, more than 50 million people of our planet are still suffering under the yoke of the imperialist colonizers who have grossly ignored the provisions of that historic Declaration.
83.	At present the colonizers are trying to maintain at all costs their domination over the last remaining small colonies, and they are resorting to various subtle tricks in order to disguise their expansionist policy of enslaving the colonial peoples. The colonial Powers under the pretence of giving "assistance" to the developing countries pursue the policy of neo-colonialism.
84.	It is not surprising that now and then one hears voices, even from this rostrum, counselling the colonial and dependent people not to practise "undue haste" and take "extreme actions", and even urging them to find "common interest and agreement" with the colonizers. In this connexion, a saying springs to one's mind: "An insincere counsellor is more dangerous than an open foe".
85.	We welcome, of course, the peaceful outcome of the struggle of these peoples for their independence and freedom. But here we should like to state categorically that to advise the oppressed peoples to search for areas of common interest and agreement with colonizers is tantamount to calling for non-resistance to the arbitrary outrages and acts of violence committed by the foreign oppressors. Those who give such counsel pretend to be the friends of the enslaved people, but they are nothing but proponents of colonialism.
86.	The delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic is of the opinion that the United Nations and its Members should take all necessary measures to secure immediate and full implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples in order that on the day of the twentieth anniversary of our Organization we might also be able to celebrate the complete liquidation of the colonial regime. We expect that the eighteenth session will make due contribution to this end.
87.	The Mongolian People's Republic, which advocates stoutly the cause of safeguarding and strengthening world peace as a peace-loving country of Asia, cannot but show special anxiety concerning peace and tranquillity in that part of the world. Our country desires to have relations of friendly co-operation with all nations of Asia on the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence,
88.	It should be admitted that the peace-loving nations are seriously alarmed about the present international situation in some regions of this continent. Under the pretence of giving "assistance" on the basis of bilateral and multilateral agreements, imperialist Powers, the United States of America in particular, are activizing their expansionist schemes in Asia.
89.	Ten years have already elapsed since the time when an agreement on an armistice was concluded and a cease-fire was reached in Korea. This armistice, however, has not yet become a lasting peace. Korea is still in a state of unrelieved tension and remains divided into two parts —North and South. Political chaos and economic bankruptcy caused by the domination of foreign imperialists and their puppets are characteristic of the present situation in South Korea.
90.	The presence of alien troops and, in addition, the conversion of this country into foreign military bases not only hampers the peaceful solution of the Korean question on a just and democratic basis, but also poses a serious threat to the cause of peace in the Far East and the world over. The concoction of a military and political alliance between the military junta of South Korea and militarist forces of Japan further aggravates the situation in this regime of the world.
91.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic once again insists that United States and other foreign troops should immediately be withdrawn from South Korea, and the Korean people thus be given the opportunity to solve by themselves, and for themselves, the question of the unification of their motherland.
92.	The tense situation in South Viet-Nam and in neighbouring Laos has become a matter of serious concern for all peace-loving nations. The United States, in flagrant violation of the Geneva Agreement has actually occupied South Viet-Nam and is conducting "an undeclared war" against the peaceful population and patriotic forces of this country, hypocritically exploitating the slogan of the struggle against so-called "communist aggression" as a camouflage for their deeds.
93.	In recent days, the Ngo Dinh Diem regime has been carrying out inhuman punitive operations against the peaceful inhabitants of South Viet-Nam. The Buddhist monks are being shot in their very pagodas and demonstrations by students, teachers and other strata of society who demand the immediate cessation of these atrocities are being suppressed by force of arms.
94.	Enraged by the rising liberation movement which embraces practically all strata of the population in South Viet-Nam, the Ngo Dinh Diem clique is resorting to the most callous method of repression,
95.	It would not be superfluous to cite here the admission of The New York Times, which on 22 August 1963 stated: "The crisis in South Vietnam is rooted in the oppressively dictatorial character of the Ngo family government and its widespread unpopularity."
96.	Whenever the Ngo regime, torn by internal discords, fails to show efficiency in forceful repression of the patriotic movement of the population, Washington threatens to reduce its dollar aid. Meekly Saigon hastens to report that it is bending all its efforts to the expansion of its punitive operations. As is well known however, this is useless. The United States Government should realize that neither American dollars nor high-ranking United States missions will save the Ngo regime, which does not enjoy the support of the country's people, from its final downfall.
97.	What is to be done in order to restore real peace and democratic freedom in South Viet-Nam? The United States should immediately stop its gross interference in the internal affairs of South Viet-Nam and withdraw all its military personnel from this country. The people of South Viet-Nam should be given a real opportunity to decide their own problems themselves without any interference from outside.
98.	My country, together with fifteen other nations of Asia and Africa, has submitted to the present session of the General Assembly for its consideration a question on the violation of human rights in South Viet-Nam [A/5489 and Add.1-3]. In this connexion we consider it necessary to state here that the substance of this question is not limited only to the matter of violation of human rights; it relates, as I have already indicated above, to matters of a more serious nature. The Mongolian delegation is confident that the present session will give due attention to the discussion of this important problem and will adopt a decision which meets the just demand of world public opinion that an end be put immediately to the terror and repression directed against the peaceful population of South Viet-Nam, and that the armed interference of the United States in the domestic affairs of this country be brought to an end.
99.	Open foreign interference in the domestic matters of Laos, in violation of the Geneva Agreements, and the resurgence of reactionary forces in this country are undermining its national independence, unity and neutrality. The solution of the Laotian problem by peaceful means, the prevention of the flare-up of a civil war —these are required for preserving the peace in South-East Asia.
100.	The peoples of Asia cannot but view with deep concern the dangerous undertaking of the Government of Japan by which it offers its ports to the United States Polaris submarines and its territory for bases for American bombers carrying nuclear weapons.
101.	Our delegation hopes that the General Assembly will take definite measures aimed at putting an end to this dangerous development of events in South-East Asia and the Far East. We shall thus make a clear contribution to the cause of preserving and consolidating peace in Asia and throughout the world.
102.	I should like now to touch briefly on a particular question. As is known, the Government of the Mongolian People's Republic, guided by humanitarian ideals, made a proposal for inclusion on the provisional agenda of the present session of the General Assembly of the question of the policy of genocide carried out by the Iraqi authorities against the Kurdish people. Perhaps those present here are well aware of the inhuman and brutal repressions that are being launched by the authorities in Iraq against the Kurdish people in response to their just demand that they be granted local autonomy Within the Republic of Iraq. I am not going to speak here on the positive response this proposal has met with on the part of public opinion and what reaction it has evoked on the part of the ruling circles of Iraq. My delegation simply wishes to explain the motives that have caused us to withdraw the Kurdish question from the agenda of the eighteenth session. We have refrained from insisting that this question be discussed mainly by reason of our respect for, and our desire to preserve, the spirit of African-Asian solidarity, and in so doing we took into consideration the opinions expressed by delegations of a number of friendly countries of Asia and Africa. However, true to our high humanitarian principles, we reserve the right to raise this question again if the development of events compels us to take this course. We remain firmly convinced that when the fate of a whole ethnic group in any country is in question, no one has the right to stand aside unconcernedly if he respects the principles of justice and humanity.
103.	The delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic considers that the United Nations should play an ever-increasing role in international economic life in conformity with the purposes and principles of its Charter. My delegation notes with satisfaction that recent years have witnessed a firm trend in this direction.
104.	The seventeenth session of the General Assembly, which on the proposal of the Soviet Union had discussed such important questions as the economic consequences of disarmament, and the convening of an international conference on trade, and had adopted important resolutions on these matters, was significant particularly in this request. Our delegation at the past session, in the deliberations on the expansion of international economic co-operation, whole-heartedly welcomed and supported the decision to convene an international conference on the questions of trade and development.
105.	In the view of my delegation, the main task of such a conference is to pave the way toward new relations in international economic and trade co-operation among States with different social systems and different levels of economic development, and to elaborate the basic principles of such co-operation. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should adopt positive decisions on such important questions as the elimination of discriminatory policies in trade carried out by exclusive groupings, the setting-up of a world trade organization covering all States without exception, and the expansion of economic co-operation and trade on the basis of principles of equality and mutual benefit. We are convinced that trade relations based on such principles will create favourable conditions for bettering the general international situation.
106.	Nearly two decades have elapsed since the foundation of the United Nations. Since then considerable changes have taken place in the world, including changes in the correlation of political forces in the international arena. The United Nations membership has grown from the initial fifty-one States to 111. The increasing influx of newly independent nations of Asia and Africa into this Organization and the widening of the ranks of socialist States in it could not but exert a favourable influence on the character of its entire activities.
107.	The true picture of today's world and the principles and objectives of the Charter, which defines this Organization as a principal instrument for preserving universal peace, demand that the work of the United Nations should become more effective and more fruitful. To meet these demands the United Nations should become truly universal and the structure of its main bodies should correspond to the present realities. Nevertheless an abnormal situation still continues to exist in the United Nations.
108.	The legitimate right of the People's Republic of China-one of the founding Members of this Organization and a permanent member of the Security Council —has not been restored, because of the discriminatory and improvident policy of some Western countries. This abnormal situation is damaging the prestige of the United Nations and the effectiveness of its work.
109.	The delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic demands that an end be put to this policy of discrimination against the great Chinese people. The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic, as before, insists that the seat of China in the United Nations be taken solely by the representative of the Government of the People's Republic of China. The Chiang Kai-shek clique, entrenched on the island of Taiwan, an integral part of the territory of the Chinese People's Republic, represents no one. It does not have the right to occupy the seat of China in the United Nations, and its representatives should be immediately removed from all United Nations bodies.
110.	The Mongolian delegation fully shares the opinion of the representatives of the African-Asian countries regarding the necessity for changing the structure of some United Nations bodies, considering it, as we do, a measure properly responsive to the realities of today. We must note with regret, however, that one act of violation of justice gives rise to a new injustice. The absence of the People's Republic of China from the United Nations has become, ironically, one of the obstacles blocking an adequate representation of newly independent States in the main organs of the United Nations.
111.	Any alteration in the essential structure of the main organs in the United Nations, as would be required by an enlargement in the number of its constituent elements, necessarily involves a review of the Charter. In the opinion on my delegation, discussion of this question without the participation of the People's Republic of China —a permanent member of the Security Council— constitutes violation of the Charter itself. On the other hand, we consider pertinent and feasible the proposal to redistribute present seats in some principal organs of the United Nations according to the main geographical regions in order to secure thereby adequate representation.
112.	The Mongolian people, who are engaged on peaceful constructive labours for the accomplishment of the socialist building of their country, value peace and friendship among peoples and are in favour of the developing and expanding of friendly co-operation with all nations in the spirit of the lofty principles of the United Nations Charter. Our nation is deeply convinced that peoples throughout the world, uniting their common efforts, will attain peace and protect it from any encroachments,
113.	My delegation assures the Assembly that our people, whose ideal is peace —peace without either words or weapons of war— will spare no effort to support any activities of the United Nations which have for their end and aim the consolidating of world peace and security among peoples.
