Mr. President, I would like first of all to associate myself with the previous speakers who have congratulated you on your election to the high office of President of this session of the General Assembly.

78. The delegation of the Romanian People's Republic shares the view, expressed here in the course of our debates, that the present session of the United Nations General Assembly, through the decisions it will adopt, will make a constructive contribution to the solution of the vital international issues facing mankind.

79. It is the opinion of the Romanian People's Republic, as stated from this rostrum by Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, the President of the State Council, that:
"The promotion among States of the principles of peaceful coexistence and the development of relations of multilateral co-operation among them with a view to maintaining and strengthening peace is the very 'raison d'être' of the United Nations." [873rd meeting, para. 61.]
On that occasion, the President of the State Council also expressed the conviction that:
"... every Member State —large or small— has the duty to make its own active contribution to the concrete affirmation of the principle of peaceful coexistence in international relations. ..." [ibid., par a. 72].
This, in a nut-shell, is what the United Nations means to Romania, and what it understands to be the duties incumbent upon the Members of this Organization.

80. The Romanian Government and people consider that the United Nations must play an active role and accomplish the mission entrusted to it by the Charter of eliminating the danger of thermo-nuclear war and strengthening international peace and security —which are essential if the people of the world are to achieve their aspirations.

81. The ardent desires of all peoples are directed more than ever before towards economic, social and cultural progress and towards the full use of the resource's of our planet, so that they may enjoy the fruits of their creative work and of the achievements of modern science and technology. The main task of all States and all Governments imbued with a sense of responsibility towards their peoples is to work for the creation of the international conditions necessary for the attainment of these ends, and/or the peaceful solution of international issues.

82. In our time, when stockpiles of weapons which are unparalleled in their destructive capacity have been accumulated in various parts of the world, when the unleashing of a world thermo-nuclear conflict would inflict incalculable losses upon mankind, every possible effort must be made to protect humanity from a devastating war.

83. This goal, which is of primary importance, can perfectly well be attained through general and complete disarmament, which is the shortest and safest way to remove the danger of war, to release tremendous material and human resources for peaceful ends, and to develop fruitful co-operation among States. Although it strives at all times for general and complete disarmament, Romania is also in favour of the proposals to apply certain partial or regional measures aimed at reducing international tension and at paving the way towards an agreement on general and complete disarmament.

84. It was In this spirit that, on 8 August of this year, the Government of Romania signed the Treaty banning nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water, even though this Treaty does not cover nuclear test in all environments or solve the major problems of preventing the dangers to world peace inherent in the armaments race and the stockpiling of atomic and hydrogen weapons. We regarded this Treaty as a step forward in the direction of an international "détente" and evidence that international issues can be solved through negotiation. At the same time, the Romanian Government expressed the hope that the conclusion of the Treaty would create favourable conditions for further steps towards the achievement of general and complete disarmament.

85. The obstacles which remain to be overcome are complex and numerous. The Romanian Government firmly maintains the view that the efforts of all must be directed, with perseverance, patience and realism, towards bringing the points of view closer together and finding mutually advantageous solutions. The method of negotiation, which the Romanian Government has consistently advocated, has proved effective in solving some acute international problems, such as last year's crisis in the Caribbean area, where the danger of a nuclear conflict was averted in this way. The commitments then made must be fulfilled to the letter.

86. The consideration of situations which vitally affect international peace and security, of the major and urgent issues of the world of today, of the question of general and complete disarmament and of measures to bring about a relaxation of tension and the decisions regarding them call for the participation of statesmen entrusted with the highest responsibilities. The Romanian delegation considers the proposal made by the Soviet Union (see 1208th meeting, para. 130) to convene a high-level conference of the States members of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee early next year to be a measure which would provide an appropriate framework for the most fruitful discussion both of general and complete disarmament and of individual measure to relax international tension. The Romanian People's Republic looks upon its participation in the work of that Committee with the highest sense of responsibility and supports all proposals the implementation of which would be conducive to the discontinuance of the armaments race and the establishment of a weapons-free world. My country, which has closely followed the developments in the debate on the use of outer space for peaceful purposes, would welcome the conclusion of an agreement banning the placing of nuclear weapons in orbit.

87. In the view of the Romanian delegation, the recent Soviet proposal (ibid., para. 137) concerning the retention of a limited number of nuclear weapons delivery vehicles on the territories of the Soviet Union and the United States of America until the end of the process of general and complete disarmament ranks among those proposals which, because they meet the position of the other party half-way, facilitate the narrowing of the gap between the respective positions.

88. A significant move towards ensuring peace in the world and creating an atmosphere of "détente " would be the liquidation of the last vestiges of the Second World War by the conclusion of a peace treaty with Germany, In this matter, the position of the Romanian Government is based on its recognition of the existence of two German States and of the need to put an end to the occupation of West Berlin and to make it a free and demilitarized city.

89. As it considers that the liquidation of military blocs would greatly help to improve the international situation and strengthen security throughout the world, the Romanian Government is in favour of the conclusion, as a transitional measure, of a non-aggression pact between the States members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the States signatories of the Treaty of Warsaw.

90. Another measure which might help us to move forward in the sphere of disarmament would be the reduction —and, as an initial step in that direction, the freezing— of the military budgets of States, which absorb huge amounts of money, resources and human energy for non-productive purposes, while a considerable portion of the world's population lives in the most inhuman conditions.

91. Proceeding from the belief that it is the duty of all States to help to consolidate peace and, above all, to establish good relations in the regions to which they belong, in 1957 and 1959, the Government of the Romanian People's Republic submitted proposals to the other Governments of the Balkan countries with a view to concluding a treaty which would turn the Balkans into an area of peace and co-operation, an area without nuclear arms and without nuclear weapons delivery vehicles. The past few years have fully confirmed the reasonableness of these proposals, and the increasing need to adopt specific measures for their implementation.

92. At the fifteenth session of the General Assembly, the Romanian People's Republic proposed for inclusion in the agenda the item entitled "Actions on the regional level with a view to improving good neighbourly relations among European States having different social and political systems". The General Assembly unanimously decided to include the item in that session's agenda. In the explanatory memorandum circulated in connexion with the inclusion of the item, the Romanian delegation expressed its belief that:
"any improvement in the relations among States on a regional level would contribute to the improvement of international relations as a whole, to the creation of a favourable atmosphere for peace in the whole world, for international security, for settlement of the big yet unsolved international issues".
Today, three years after the item was placed on the General Assembly's agenda, we note that the idea of regional agreements, in various aspects, is gaining increasing support and that the efficacy of such measures has been confirmed by the submission of numerous proposals.

93. The extent to which the idea of setting up denuclearized zones by comprehensive regional agreements reflects a desire for peace and security among all peoples is borne out also by the proposals for the denuclearization of Africa, Asia, the Pacific region and Latin America. The denuclearization of Latin America is on the agenda of the present session, [item 74], while the denuclearization of Africa and the need to put an end to the dissemination of nuclear weapons, are the subject of resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its sixteenth session [resolutions 1652 (XVI) and 1665 (XVI)].

94. As regards Europe, proposals have been made to establish denuclearized zones in northern and central Europe, in the Balkans, and in the regions of the Adriatic and the Mediterranean. The proposed regional agreements might lead to the formation of a system of denuclearized zones extending from the north of Europe to the seas in the south of that region. In this manner it would be possible to create an effective means of removing the danger of thermo-nuclear war between European States having different social and political systems, and a real and substantial contribution could thus be made to the lessening of international tension in general.

95. We also have before us other proposals providing for measures aimed at improving international relations, lessening international tension and establishing a propitious climate for the solution of issues at present dividing European countries which have different social and political systems.

96. We are of the opinion that the General Assembly ought to begin consideration of these proposals, concentrating on the most important and urgent problems and recommending principles and measures likely to facilitate the negotiation and conclusion of such regional agreements between the States concerned.

97. With these considerations in mind and inspired by the desire to contribute to the strengthening of international peace and security and to the establishment of a framework in which the widest possible regional agreements of the type described could be prepared, the Romanian delegation, on instructions from the Government of the Romanian People's Republic, requests that the item: "Actions on the regional level with a view to improving good neighbourly relations among European States having different social and political systems" [see A/5557] should be again placed on the General Assembly's agenda at the current session. We are convinced that debate on this question will give a further impetus to the efforts being made at various levels to improve relations between the States of Europe.

98. In our day the movement for national liberation has brought down one after another the walls within which the world colonial system had for many centuries kept scores of peoples in the most cruel subjection. This process, one of immense importance for the progress of human society, has spread over entire continents. More than fifty peoples in Asia, Africa and Latin America have won their independence by their efforts and have set out on the path of free development and self-determination. The final and complete elimination of colonialism is an irreversible process which can no longer be checked. It represents a chapter of great importance in the history of mankind and a mighty force in the forward march of the peoples towards peace and progress.

99. Colonial rule is still maintained in certain territories, where the desire for freedom and the right to self-determination are stifled by repressive measures. In violation of the provisions of the United Nations Charter and of General Assembly resolutions, the colonial Powers have resorted to military operations against indigenous populations in an attempt to prolong the existence of a system finally condemned by history. In Angola, South West Africa, Southern Rhodesia and other colonies, the peoples are waging a determined struggle to win their independence. In South Africa, where racial discrimination has been raised to the level of public policy, the African population is engaged in a courageous struggle for its fundamental rights.

100. The recently liberated States are in an increasingly strong position to counter the neo-colonialist methods by which the former metropolitan Powers seek to prevent new States from consolidating their economic independence. This is being made clear in the general debate this year. Faithful to its policy of supporting the cause of independence and national freedom for all the oppressed peoples, Romania expresses its cordial sympathy with those who are fighting for the elimination of the last vestiges of colonial slavery.

101. We consider that it is the duty of the United Nations, which has irrevocably condemned colonialism, to ensure that the provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples are implemented without delay in the interests of international peace and security and the progress of humanity,

102. There are still certain sources of tension and conflict and of threats to peace in South-East Asia and the Far East, which give rise to legitimate concern. In South Korea, for example, the presence of foreign troops represents the main obstacle to the fulfilment of the Korean people's legitimate desire for the peaceful unification of their country. A grave situation still prevails in South Viet-Nam, where, by the violation of the Geneva agreement, by foreign interference and by the suppression of the fundamental rights of the population, the free expression of the people's will to re-establish the country's unity by peaceful means is thwarted.

103. The problem of economic development undeniably represents an essential feature of all international activity and one of the fundamental concerns of the United Nations.

104. The need to find and to evolve specific measures to promote the economic development of the underdeveloped areas and to strengthen economic cooperation among all States has also found expression in the present session of the General Assembly. One important action taken in this connexion is the decision to convene the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in 1964. The Romanian delegation believes that the promotion of international trade on a mutually advantageous basis and the elimination of discriminatory measures and obstructive customs tariffs will enable world trade to play its proper part in speeding up economic development and in building a climate of international confidence and co-operation.

105. Attaching particular importance to that Conference, the Romanian Government has proposed for inclusion in the agenda, items on such matters as the elaboration of the fundamental principles for economic and trade agreements, the importance and effectiveness of long-term trade agreements in securing the stability and development of international trade, the importance of the supply on credit of capital goods for the construction of industrial units, deliveries to be repaid by a proportion of the output of those units, and the importance, for peaceful development purposes, of the resources released by disarmament. We express the hope that these proposals will be duly considered in the debates of the Conference.

106. As the Romanian delegation pointed out at the twelfth session of the General Assembly, another measure which would do much to secure normal international economic relations would be one that might take the form of a declaration setting forth principles of international economic co-operation. My delegation is still convinced of the desirability of adopting a document of principles as an instrument of international co-operation and as a factor which would promote good relations among States, and considers that this problem should be given priority and that the preparation of such a document in the framework of the Economic and Social Council should be expedited. Similarly, the exploration of the most appropriate ways and means for increasing the pace of economic development should find its proper place in the proceedings of this session.

107. The current session will certainly also tackle such problems as industrialization, the utilization of the most recent scientific and technical advances, the need to draw up national plans for economic development, the training and specialization of national cadres and an expanded exchange of economic, technical and scientific experience.

108. In the Romanian People's Republic, the many- sided development of the economy, the industrialization of the country and the achievement of a higher level of living for its people on the basis of scientifically prepared development plans, represent fundamental principles of economic policy, which are being consistently applied by the Government. By these means, the Romanian's People's Republic has succeeded in achieving, within less than two decades, a balanced development of all branches of the national economy, with important advances in the country's industrialization and a higher standard of living.
109. Thus, the structure of Romanian industry has been radically altered, and new branches of industry have been created to transform and utilize the country's raw materials. The steady development of the Romanian economy is demonstrated by the fact that the average annual growth rate of Romania's industrial production which was 12.7 per cent between 1950 and 1959, rose to 15,8 per cent during the first three years of the Six-Year Plan, i.e. in the period 1960-1962.

110. Romania's steady economic progress has created the conditions required for the extension of economic relations with other States. Our country maintains economic and trade relations with more than eighty States in various parts of the world.

111. It is the Romanian Government's consistent policy to promote peace and international co-operation and to work for the objectives of its six-year economic plan. This creates new possibilities for active participation in international trade with all countries, irrespective of their social and economic systems, on the basis of mutual advantage and equal rights.

112. The Romanian Government and people believe that the United Nations, this great international forum founded on the principles of the sovereignty and equality of all States, of non-interference in their domestic affairs and of respect for their territorial integrity, can and should make a significant contribution to the speedy solution of the problems facing mankind.

113. The Romanian delegation is in favour of strengthening our Organization, which should become an active instrument for world peace and co-operation. The efficiency and prestige of the United Nations are seriously weakened, however, by the fact that the principle of universality, upon which this Organization is built, continues today to be disregarded. As it has done previously, the Romanian delegation firmly supports the restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China, a founding Member of the United Nations and a permanent member of the Security Council, and the immediate removal of the Chiang Kai-shek usurpers. The refusal to allow the People's Republic of China to take its rightful place in the United Nations greatly limits the Organization in its task of promoting co-operative and friendly relations between States and maintaining international peace and security.

114. The agenda for this session includes many items on which useful discussion may take place and which may lead to the implementation of the principles embodied in the United Nations Charter. Among these items is the one entitled "Measures designed to promote among youth the ideals of peace, mutual respect and understanding between peoples" [item 47], which was placed on the agenda at the request of Romania at the General Assembly's fifteenth session and which since then has been receiving the attention of the United Nations and other international organizations.

115. At the seventeenth session, the Romanian delegation submitted for consideration a draft declaration embodying what we feel should be the guiding principles for all efforts in the field of training the rising generation. We are confident that this proposal will be studied carefully by the General Assembly during the current session and that appropriate decisions will be taken with regard to this important problem.

116. The eighteenth session has to deal with a variety of important problems whose solution is awaited by all the peoples of the world. There are still difficulties in the way of their solution, and we cannot expect to see these difficulties overcome at once. If the session we are now attending can contribute to the establishment of a healthy climate in which we may find or come nearer to workable solutions, a climate in which reason may prevail in the relations between States, then the Romanian delegation believes that the results of the session will be counted among the useful contributions to man's unremitting efforts to achieve peace and understanding among peoples.

117. The Romanian delegation for its part will do all in its power to contribute actively to the success of the work undertaken at this session.
