As I take the floor it gives me particular pleasure to express to you, Mr. President, both on my own behalf and on that of my delegation, our sincerest congratulations on your election as President of the United Nations General Assembly. Your distinguished personal qualities, your unswerving fidelity to the principles of the Charter and your thorough knowledge of the work of the United Nations give us the assurance that you will be brilliantly successful in discharging the functions of your high office. The fact that you have been chosen is likewise proof of the respect and friendship which your country has won within the great family of the United Nations.
119.	On this occasion I should also like to pay a tribute to your eminent predecessor, Mr. Zafrulla Khan, whose distinguished services to the cause of peace and international co-operation do honour to his country and to him personally.
120.	During the past year the United Nations Secretary-General, U Thant, on whose shoulders the heaviest responsibilities of our Organization rest, has repeatedly had occasion, by demonstrating his exceptional qualities as a statesman, to justify the confidence placed in him by the United Nations. The skill, impartiality and wisdom which he has displayed in particularly delicate circumstances command the respect and admiration of us all.
121.	In the light of this session’s agenda, I should like to make a brief statement of my delegation's views on the principal events which have taken place on the international scene since we last met, While this period has not proved decisive for the solution of the problems affecting world peace and security, it has been marked by encouraging developments in that direction.
122.	During this period we had occasion to follow with interest several useful meetings which took place in a more favourable atmosphere than in the past between the representatives of the Powers which bear a particular responsibility in the matter of international peace. This permits us to hope that the long and sterile confrontations which characterized the postwar period will now perhaps be succeeded by a new political climate in which it will be possible to open the way to an improvement in the situation on the basis of existing realities and of mutual trust.
123.	I should like at this point to say that the Cuban crisis, for all the dangers with which it was fraught, provided a fresh point of departure in the search for more effective ways and means of achieving a relaxation of tension. At the beginning of the seventeenth session of the General Assembly we were aware that the Cuban crisis was day by day assuming more alarming proportions and threatening mankind with the prospect of an imminent thermo-nuclear war. If in the end mankind was spared the catastrophe of an atomic war, that outcome was attributable primarily to the courageous actions and the good sense of the statesman concerned. I should like also to praise the efforts made in those circumstances by the United Nations Secretary-General. His attitude during the crisis, inspired by his great devotion to the cause of peace and supported by the high moral authority of the United Nations, helped to make it possible for the principles enunciated in the Charter to prevail. This development augurs well for the spirit which should predominate in international relations in the future.
124.	The progress made towards a relaxation of tension since the Cuban crisis enables us for the first time to hope that this trend will become more pronounced. The establishment of a direct communications link between the capitals of the two great atomic Powers is certainly a measure that will help to eliminate the possibility of a war breaking out by miscalculation.
125.	The most encouraging step in this direction, however, has unquestionably been the Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water. We consider that the prohibition of these tests, which are harmful to the health of present and future generations, is a positive first step towards the halting of the armaments race. That is why the Turkish Government welcomed the conclusion of this agreement and was one of the first countries to sign it. We hope that this Treaty will be followed by the prohibition of underground nuclear tests and will open the way to other and broader measures that will lead to general and complete disarmament, which today as yesterday constitutes the essential problem which mankind must face. Among the items on the agenda of the General Assembly's eighteenth session, this problem, the solution of which will be the cornerstone of international peace and security, should unquestionably be one of our foremost concerns.
126.	The establishment of a lasting system of peace and security based on the principles of freedom, justice and equal rights for all peoples, in conformity with the United Nations Charter, is the sincerest wish of the Turkish Government and people. My Government is firmly convinced that such a system of peace and security, to which all mankind aspires, can be established only through the achievement of general, complete and balanced disarmament, carried out by stages under effective international control and embracing both nuclear and conventional weapons. Since the days of the League of Nations and more recently, within the United Nations, Turkey has contributed unceasingly to the efforts to achieve a settlement of this problem.
127.	X shall not go into detail here concerning the progress and setbacks that have characterized the question of disarmament. The complexity of the problem must not, however, cause us to slacken our efforts, for the continuing interest of the General Assembly in this problem is indispensable to its solution.
128.	As I had occasion to state from this rostrum at the seventeenth session [1135th meeting], the guiding principles laid down in the joint statement of the United States and the Soviet Union concerning disarmament negotiations and confirmed by the General Assembly in its unanimously adopted resolution 1722 (XVT) constitute the foundations on which a realistically conceived disarmament programme must be built. Such a programme must also, in conformity with the principles of the Charter, include appropriate procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes and effective arrangements for the maintenance of peace.
129.	The basic difficulty which stands in the way of disarmament is undeniably the question of control, a topic repeatedly referred to in the records of previous sessions. Here again it seems to me that the way to overcome the difficulty, which it would be foolish to minimize, is clearly indicated in the principles I have just mentioned. I should like in this connexion to quote paragraph 6 of the joint statement: "All disarmament measures should be implemented from beginning to end under such strict and effective international control as would provide firm assurance that all parties are honouring their obligations. During and after the implementation of general and complete disarmament, the most thorough control should be exercised, the nature and extent of such control depending on the requirements for verification of the disarmament measures being carried out in each stage. To implement control over and inspection of disarmament, an international disarmament organization including all parties to the agreement should be created within the framework of the United Nations. This international disarmament organization and its inspectors should be assured unrestricted access without veto to all places, as necessary for the purpose of effective verification."
130.	These various aspects of the disarmament question which I have briefly reviewed confirm the fact that the frightful destructive power of weapons which are constantly increasing in number and diversity, and the speed and range of the vehicles designed to carry them, make peace and security more indivisible than ever. This fact alone suffices to demonstrate that disarmament problems must be solved, not in a fragmentary and regional way, but globally, on a world scale, and within the framework of a programme of general and complete disarmament under effective international control.
131.	Being fully convinced of the incalculable advantages which would result from the achievement of general and complete disarmament, the people and the Government of Turkey whole-heartedly support every constructive effort to that end. Convinced as we are, however, of the need to achieve general and complete disarmament as rapidly as possible, we are equally convinced of the need to be wary of any partial solutions which might jeopardize the desired goal of balance, peace and security. In support of this view I cite the decision, unanimously adopted by the General Assembly, that all measures of general and complete disarmament should be balanced so that in the implementation of the treaty no State or group of States could gain military advantage to the detriment of the others and that security would be ensured in equal measure for all.
132.	Proposals to limit the means of defence of States in certain areas without the prior establishment and implementation of a programme of general and complete disarmament would seriously endanger the security of the States in question. As long as atomic weapons and the means of delivering nuclear weapons are in the possession or at the disposal of a group of States which could use them against other countries, such proposals would simply result in unilaterally depriving States situated in critical areas of adequate means of defence and would likewise endanger the collective security arrangements made in conformity with the United Nations Charter for the sole purpose of self defence.
133.	As I said at the beginning of my remarks on the question of disarmament, a new atmosphere conducive to the establishment of mutual trust and understanding seems to be emerging in international relations, an atmosphere that could well lead to the conclusion of the agreements which are essential to world peace and security. We therefore whole-heartedly share the hopes and desires so eloquently expressed in this connexion by the speakers who have preceded me here,
134.	With reference to this same topic I should like on behalf of my delegation to express our most sincere hopes that the work being carried on in the Committee on Disarmament at Geneva will be expedited so that specific and detailed conclusions capable of leading to the achievement of general and complete disarmament may be reached. My Government, for its part, will continue to give unfailing support to all efforts being made to achieve this objective, to which the fate and the well-being of mankind are closely linked.
135.	The efforts to promote the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space are being followed with interest by my Government. The importance which the United Nations attaches to the progress of the work undertaken in this new field of activity so characteristic of modern times surely merits the unanimous approval and encouragement of world public opinion.
136.	The few comments which I have just made on certain developments and current problems may prove useful to the process of conceiving and bringing into being a happier era in international relations. I deem it equally necessary, however, to draw the attention of this Assembly to a point which has been a cause of constant and serious concern. Although the atmosphere of mistrust which vitiated international relations in past years seems to be giving way to a more wholesome frame of mind, we still have a long way to go before we reach the point where international relations are free from the prejudices of the post-war period. Consequently, it is important to guard just as much against the disappointments which would result from excessive optimism as against the delaying effects of an unjustified lack of trust. Considering the problem in this light, we feel that we should not lose sight of present realities, which compel us to seek just and lasting solutions to the questions of general security.
137.	These questions are not limited to disarmament. They also embrace certain other problems which, to our great regret, have remained unsolved for a very long time. In this connexion I should like to make special reference to the question of Berlin and Germany. The Turkish people, who cherish feelings of warm friendship for the German people, regret that that nation should still be deprived of its national unity despite the principles recognized by the United Nations Charter. My delegation would like to think that the new efforts to improve relations between East and West will also serve to increase the possibilities for a solution of this problem that would take into account the legitimate aspirations of the German people.
138.	As to the question of Korea, I should like to reiterate today the hope for a solution of this matter which I expressed here last year [1135th meeting], Turkey has consistently supported the United Nations objective of a freely unified, independent and democratic Korea. Our efforts will continue to be directed towards that goal.
139.	It has been established beyond any doubt that lasting international peace and security can be assured only if there is a climate of mutual trust and understanding. The United Nations Charter, taking cognizance of this fact, enunciates the basic principles by which Member States are to be guided in their international relations: fidelity to their undertakings, respect for the rights and the territorial integrity of other nations, the will to live in peace with neighbouring countries, non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other States, the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. These are some of the principles which we have all undertaken to observe.
140.	It need hardly be said that only scrupulous adherence to these principles will enable us gradually to dispel mistrust and thus overcome the numerous obstacles which still bestrew the path to real international co-operation. It is therefore essential that the United Nations should contribute further to the dissemination and universal application of these principles by exercising the prestige and high moral authority with which it is endowed in the realm of international affairs.
141.	Among the activities of this kind carried out by the United Nations, the effort to restore the territorial integrity of the Congo must certainly be accounted a praiseworthy achievement.
142.	Noteworthy progress has again been made this year in international co-operation at the regional level. Certain countries situated in the economically less-developed regions have decided to combine their efforts with a view to strengthening their security and developing their common resources. Turkey has always held the view that such arrangements established in conformity with the Charter and designed to promote regional co-operation, are a force for peace and stability and at the same time enable their members to achieve a more rapid economic recovery.
143.	As we all know, on 25 May 1963, at the conclusion of the conference which brought the African and Malagasy Heads of State and Government together at Addis Ababa, the Organization of African Unity was set up. We welcome the establishment of this organization, the purposes of which are to strengthen the unity and security of the signatory States and promote cooperation among them and thus to raise the level of living of the African people. We hope that this organization will contribute to the harmonious and balanced development of the African continent and thus strengthen international co-operation.
144.	The accession of colonial peoples to freedom and independence has proved to be one of the most remarkable phenomena of our time. We are extremely happy to note that one of the ideals of humanity, solemnly proclaimed in the Charter, is well on the way to complete realization. Indeed, this unprecedented development in the emancipation of nations confirms the soundness of the principles of our Charter, which are in conformity with universally accepted modern concepts.
145.	The United Nations can be justly proud of the contribution which it has made to the emancipation of peoples. From an original membership of fifty-one States, it has increased more than twofold and is thus on the way to universality, which is one of its objectives.
146.	A tribute is due to the spirit of co-operation and the fidelity to the principles of the Charter which the great majority of Member States have displayed in effectively helping the United Nations to achieve this lofty aim. It is remarkable that a task of such historic magnitude could have been carried out in a relatively short space of time, The understanding shown by the principal administering Powers in evaluating the pressing needs of our time likewise deserves to be recognized as a positive and constructive factor in this welcome development.
147.	The Turkish Republic, ever since its establishment has proclaimed its unshakable faith in the notion of independence and has constantly affirmed that this inherent right of nations constitutes one of the foundations of international morality. That is why Turkey has always taken a special interest in the cause of the colonial peoples and has supported the efforts made in the United Nations to advance it, in conformity with the spirit and the provisions of the Charter. My delegation expresses the firm hope that the Assembly, as a centre for harmonizing international relations, will succeed in completing this historic task with all the wisdom and realism which it has always displayed.
148.	The economic and social items on the agenda are again of such importance as to warrant our most careful attention. If the close interdependence of political stability and economic and social well-being is taken into account, there can be no doubt that the solution of many political problems and, consequently, the maintenance of peace itself depend in large measure on the action taken in this sphere.
149.	Because the continuing disparity between the level of living of the developed countries and that of the developing countries is not conducive to the establishment or maintenance of harmonious international relations, the active participation of the United Nations in the struggle of its Member States to overcome poverty, disease and illiteracy is of paramount importance.
150.	Although there exist today technical possibilities without precedent in history for the rapid development of the less favoured areas of the earth, many countries, as is well known, are having serious difficulties carrying out their development programmes owing to a lack of capital, trained personnel, basic facilities, skills and technical knowledge. The United Nations has been making a tremendous effort to overcome these difficulties through the technical co-operation programmes of the United Nations itself and of the specialized agencies.
151.	The Special Fund in particular has made remarkable progress since it was established in 1958, and its contribution to the economic advancement of the developing and less developed countries deserves special mention.
152.	The exceptional services rendered by all these agencies in the economic and social fields are praiseworthy; yet the problem is of such scope and complexity that further efforts by the United Nations are called for so that the action being taken may be made even more effective. We hope that the objectives of the United Nations Development Decade will be fully achieved. As stated in the relevant resolution [1710 (XVI)] of which Turkey was a sponsor, the economic and social development of the economically less developed countries is basic to the attainment of international peace and security and to a faster increase in world prosperity. We are convinced that effective international co-operation within the framework of this resolution will also enhance the prestige of the United Nations.
153.	The United Nations is assuming ever wider international responsibilities by virtue both of its economic, social and cultural endeavours and of the activities which it is called upon to undertake for the maintenance of peace. If we sincerely want the United Nations to carry out its functions effectively, it must, of course, be provided with adequate funds; otherwise its activities are apt to be hampered.
154.	Many countries, including Turkey, make their contributions regularly even though for some of them this represents a considerable strain on their budgets. We were therefore gratified when the General Assembly, at its fourth special session, adopted the resolution [1874 (S-IV)] establishing the principle of the collective responsibility of Member States for the financing of peace-keeping operations. The Turkish Government, for its part, has undertaken to make a contribution which is quite substantial in proportion to its budgetary possibilities. We firmly hope that the appeal made to certain countries on that occasion for the payment of their arrears will soon bring results. I should like to take this same opportunity to express to the Chairman and members of the Group of Twenty-One our deep appreciation of the efficiency with which they have carried out the task entrusted to them,
155.	At its fourth special session the General Assembly also adopted a resolution [1879 (S-IV)] calling for the establishment of a peace fund. In the light of experience it may be said that the establishment of such a fund is of particular importance because it would considerably facilitate the task of the United Nations in maintaining international peace and security. Such a fund would enable the United Nations to act quickly in discharging the obligations incumbent upon it in this regard. As the resolution so aptly states, the Secretary-General must have sufficient financial resources at his disposal so that he might be able, in accordance with the provisions of Article 1 of the Charter, to take prompt and effective action in the event of a threat to or a breach of the peace.
156.	The problems of security and economic progress to which I have just referred are awaiting solutions which cannot fail to influence the daily lives and immediate future of our peoples. The solution of these problems assumes a very special importance today because our society has reached a stage where social progress has become imperative. It is therefore essential to lay the foundations of a true and lasting peace as rapidly as possible so that this task may be accomplished in the most favourable circumstances.
157.	The possibilities offered by recent developments in the direction of an international relaxation of tension will surely encourage our Assembly in its efforts to attain this goal. The experience gained during the Cuban crisis, for example, placed us for the first time since the war in a situation in which we had become sufficiently mature to direct our efforts towards achieving better understanding in the field of international cooperation. I am fully convinced that the Assembly, with its customary realism, moderation, wisdom and imagination, will make the most of this propitious atmosphere.
158.	In conclusion I should like to say that my delegation, in its desire to contribute in the most constructive way to the deliberations of the General Assembly, will, as in the past, do its utmost to facilitate the solution of the problems on our agenda. It is my hope that the eighteenth session of the General Assembly will make a positive contribution to the cause of international peace and security. I am convinced that under your leadership, Mr. President, this session will bring mankind closer to the peace and well-being which constitute its deepest aspirations and its most cherished wishes.
159.	The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish); I give the floor to the representative of the Philippines to exercise the right of reply.
160.	Mr. INGLES (Philippines): The references made to my country this morning by the Minister for External Affairs of Australia have constrained me —indeed with regret— to rise and exercise the right of reply. In view of the lateness of the hour, and bearing in mind that the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines has yet to speak in the general debate —when he will undoubtedly deal in greater detail with the Philippine position on the question of Malaysia— I shall limit myself to expressing the surprise of the Philippine delegation at the attitude shown by the Australian Minister for External Affairs towards the Philippines this morning.
161.	Australia and the Philippines, as everyone must know, enjoy the friendliest relations. We have some common problems to the solution of which we are jointly dedicated. We have common interests to protect, too, as allies under the South-East Asia Treaty Organization. Against this background of friendship, my delegation was shocked to hear the Minister for External Affairs of Australia allege that Malaysia had not been spared the hostility of the Philippines.
162.	While my delegation readily recognizes that it is the privilege of Sir Garfield Barwick to champion the cause of Malaysia since Australia and Malaysia are linked together within the British Commonwealth of Nations, my delegation emphatically denies him the right to pass judgement on, much less condemn, the attitude of the Philippines towards Malaysia. Australia is not privy to the Manila Accord of 5 August 1963, and we would have expected the Australian Minister for External Affairs to be more circumspect when he attempted to interpret the provisions of that agreement. It is highly presumptuous, to say the least, for a third party, especially one claiming to encourage agreement among the parties directly concerned, to come to this rostrum and question the good faith of any of the parties to the Manila Accord. Never by word or deed has the Philippine Government expressed any hostility towards Malaysia. As a matter of fact, the recognition of Malaysia is still under advisement by the Philippine Government. How can Australia, or anybody for that matter, now accuse the Philippines of hostility toward Malaysia?
163.	I regret that this reply has to go into the records of this Assembly, but if in the wise judgement of the Foreign Minister of Australia he would see fit to withdraw the remarks which he made and to which this reply has been made, then, by the relation of cause and effect, that portion of his statement and this statement of mine would no longer form part of the records of the general debate.
