At the outset, I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid on his election as President of the of the General Assembly at its seventy- sixth session. We are confident that, together, we will
make further progress in addressing urgent international issues and building a safer and more sustainable world in which our peoples can look to the future with hope and confidence.
The United Arab Emirates believes that this year is a historic juncture nationally, as my country celebrates the golden jubilee of its establishment with the announcement of the Principles of the 50, which provide a socioeconomic development road map for the years ahead.
This year is also a critical juncture for the international community as we all strive to overcome the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, secure supply chains for all peoples and help them recover from the medical, economic and security impacts of the pandemic.
My country will also host Expo 2020 this year, which will open in a few days’ time. More than 190 countries will take part. We hope that this international event will help usher in the next phase of recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and support international efforts to generate hope and optimism. It will provide a platform to connect minds, develop innovative solutions for the most urgent international challenges and lay the groundwork for a brighter and more prosperous future.
Today we need wise leadership to promote multilateralism and develop a united international position to meet common global challenges. Genuine political will to overcome this difficult historical juncture is also imperative. That requires putting differences aside and strengthening relations in order to focus on the future and security of our peoples, while upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s vision to strengthen multilateralism in a manner that serves our shared interests as set out in his report Our Common Agenda.
As a priority, we must generate international momentum in order to develop peaceful solutions to conflicts and avert political crises before they escalate. In that context, the United Arab Emirates will continue its long-standing support for the efforts of the United Nations and the international community to achieve real progress in political processes.
We believe that creating an environment conducive to peace and stability, especially in our region, requires the implementation of a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire, especially in Yemen, and the maintenance of the ceasefires in Libya and Syria, as well as the departure of all foreign forces. In order to succeed in our efforts to end the cycle of conflict in the Arab region, the unacceptable regional interventions in Arab affairs, in particular in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq, must cease. Such illegal interventions have obstructed political processes, exacerbated humanitarian crises and undermined the stability of the region and the world.
The United Arab Emirates relies on a clear international position that rejects regional interventions in Arab affairs and supports Arab countries in overcoming all obstacles to peace and stability in the region. We reiterate that ensuring full respect for the sovereignty of Arab countries and reaching comprehensive political solutions under the auspices of the United Nations remain the only way to end the crises in the Arab region.
In that context, we believe that there is an opportunity to achieve sustainable peace in Yemen, which will be possible only by reaching a comprehensive political solution that includes a ceasefire to ensure stability for the brotherly people of Yemen and neighbouring countries. We have seen genuine initiatives that aim to end the war in Yemen, the most recent of which was put forward by the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
For such efforts to be successful, all parties must demonstrate commitment and determination. The Houthi militias continue their provocative and aggressive actions, obstructing the political process and hindering the efforts of the United Nations. We reiterate here the importance of committing to the Riyadh agreement and its implementation in order to unify the Yemeni people.
Supporting stability in the Arab region also requires an end to the occupation of all Palestinian and Arab territories, including the establishment of an independent Palestinian State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to achieve the two-State solution. We reiterate our call for ending the construction of settlements, the displacement of Palestinians and all other illegal practices.
One year after signing the Abraham Accords, we are encouraged by the establishment of new relations in the region, which have improved the prospects for peace and reconciliation. Through those relations, we seek to
stimulate economic growth and achieve prosperity and stability for the peoples of the region, especially the younger generations, who deserve to look to the future with optimism and hope.
The ongoing conflicts in the region, which have been exacerbated by the pandemic, threaten to contribute to a future in which extremist and terrorist groups such as the Houthis, Da’esh, Al-Qaida, the Muslim Brotherhood and Hizbullah continue their recruitment of new generations of young people to fuel violence and hatred. Accordingly, we will pursue our unrelenting efforts to counter those scourges wherever they may exist.
We must continue to build on the progress achieved in the fight against Da’esh in Syria and Iraq by strengthening regional and international cooperation and constantly refining our methods, while respecting international law. In that context, we stress the need to protect the security of energy supplies and the freedom of navigation and trade routes, while simultaneously working on de-escalation. The targeting of vital infrastructure and facilities has direct repercussions for the economy and for international peace and security.
Similarly, we must ensure that the Middle East is a region free of weapons of mass destruction. That should be the goal of all countries that are committed to protecting the international order. Reaching a common understanding with Iran that addresses all regional and international concerns remains a fundamental requirement and should start with de-escalation to achieve regional and international peace and stability.
We cannot ignore Iran’s development of its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes or its interference in the region. Therefore, any future agreement with Iran must address the shortcomings of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and must involve the countries of the region. That is a legitimate and fair request by countries that are seeking to safeguard their security and peoples. We will continue to call on Iran to respect international law and the principle of good-neighbourliness and to resolve disputes through peaceful means.
We reiterate our demand that Iran put an end to its occupation of the three United Arab Emirates Islands of the Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa. My country will never cease to demand its legitimate sovereignty over those islands, which have been occupied by Iran since 1971, in flagrant violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. My country will continue to call on Iran to agree to resolve that dispute peacefully, whether through direct negotiations or referral to the International Court of Justice.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the importance of de-escalation and overcoming the challenges that many countries face worldwide. In that regard, we stress the urgent need to strengthen security and stability in Afghanistan in order to fulfil the aspirations of its people, in particular those of its women and young people, and end their prolonged suffering in return for peace and prosperity.
As we follow the rapidly changing developments in Afghanistan and assess the political, security and humanitarian repercussions, the United Arab Emirates stresses the importance of ensuring the access of humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people in order to preserve their dignity and protect their rights. In the light of our efforts to promote tolerance and provide humanitarian assistance to all peoples in need, without discrimination, my country continues to support international humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan and to send urgent medical and food assistance, while facilitating efforts to safely evacuate Afghans and people from other countries through the United Arab Emirates.
We also emphasize the importance of maintaining security and stability in Africa. We stress the need for a comprehensive approach that addresses all security, humanitarian and development concerns throughout the continent. The African Union has undertaken vigorous and exemplary efforts that require further international support, especially in countering extremism and terrorism and promoting mediation and dialogue in order to resolve existing disagreements.
We need to strengthen our cooperation in promoting tolerance and building peaceful coexisting communities, including by countering hate speech. We celebrated the International Day of Human Fraternity for the first time this year. The United Arab Emirates is encouraged by international calls to promote interfaith and intercultural dialogue. We also reiterate that achieving sustainable peace requires the active participation of women and young people, given their vital role in preventing and resolving conflicts and building prosperous societies.
In the same vein, the United Arab Emirates is keen to strengthen its humanitarian response as part of its foreign policy and to contribute, alongside the international community, to alleviating the dire humanitarian situation in areas affected by conflicts and disasters. As a priority, we must strengthen multilateralism in order to help people respond to the pandemic, starting with the equitable distribution of vaccines, sustained humanitarian assistance and cooperation and rebuilding a sustainable economy. That will require building institutions to cope with the challenges ahead, as well as strengthening the work of regional and international organizations, in particular the United Nations, which plays a pivotal role in building resilient societies.
Particular emphasis should also be placed on future preparedness and investment in advancing security, peace and prosperity. The United Arab Emirates will therefore continue its approach towards promoting development and prosperity through an ambitious vision that combines economic development with technology and innovation.
The evident link between political issues and economic growth is crucial for our region as it looks towards the future. We stress the importance of granting people access to advanced technology. Although it is negatively exploited by some, advanced technology is a vital tool for achieving peace and addressing urgent challenges, such as climate change. My country will continue to work with its partners in the next phase to transform challenges into opportunities and harness our potential to achieve peace.
In that context, climate change remains one of the most pressing challenges, especially due to its increasingly serious repercussions. We believe that, if we intensify our international efforts, we will be able not only to reduce those repercussions and adapt to them but also to achieve many economic benefits for countries by investing in solutions that mitigate the effects of climate change. We therefore stress the need to develop a suitable global response at the twenty- sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26) and all relevant meetings.
At the same time, we view the Paris Agreement on Climate Change as an exceptional opportunity to support economic growth and create job opportunities. For its part, the United Arab Emirates will work with its partners to find solutions and explore opportunities that reduce the effects of climate change, including by hosting COP28. We also commend the tireless efforts of the International Renewable Energy Agency in Abu Dhabi to help countries to adopt renewable energy and provide solutions that address the challenges of climate change.
In conclusion, I would like to express to Member States the gratitude of the United Arab Emirates for its election as a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the 2022 to 2023 term. During our membership of the Council, my country will use its experience, expertise and approaches to build bridges to address the most pressing challenges, including extremism and terrorism, regional crises, epidemics and climate change, as well as to address issues involving women and youth and to strengthen their role in achieving peace and security.