President of the United Nations General Assembly,
Heads of State and Government,
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ladies and gentlemen,
His Excellency Mr. Patrice Talon, President of the Republic of Benin, who could not be here today, has tasked me with delivering the following address on his behalf.
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for the excellent conduct of the work of the 76th session of the United Nations General Assembly.
The theme of this session is: “Building resilience through hope — to recover from COVID-19, rebuild sustainably, respond to the needs of the planet, respect the rights of people, and revitalize the United Nations”.
When we look at the current state of the world, at various levels, we acknowledge that this theme is very significant, meaningful and relevant to our lives.
It invites us to move away from the ambient and growing scepticism and the rising despair in our hearts in order to solve our current problems and rebuild sustainably.
Mr. President,
For some time now, the international community has had to face the global and destructive reality of the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, my country thanks the United Nations and its specialized agencies, in particular the World Health Organization, for prioritizing the quest for a definitive solution to this health crisis.
Widespread and ongoing mobilization, as well as uniting our energies, have allowed for the development of vaccines. Vaccination rates are increasing throughout the world. However, Africa’s vaccination rate remains low, and the continent continues to face other equally deadly infections, namely malaria and HIV/AIDS.
Regarding our domestic management of COVID-19, the State of Benin has opted to fully vaccinate all its citizens and provide subsidization worth several billion CFA francs to people and companies whose businesses have been adversely affected by the pandemic.
In this regard, we thank all partners that support our country in its fight to achieve the SDGs, in line with the Government’s Action Programme.
With regard to the need to rebuild sustainably, we must strive to predict the occurrence of future scourges. Isolated, temporary and local action steps alone are no longer enough. Each State, each continent must open up to others so that, through common and concerted efforts and synergies in actions taken, the world can be rid, once and for all, of its concerns and fears.
Concerning insecurity caused by violent extremism and crime, my country faces two critical situations:
-	Terrorism, which is a genuine threat on its northern borders,
-	Maritime piracy in the south
To address those issues, in addition to the necessary measures taken internally, Benin joins all initiatives at the regional and international levels to ensure peace, free movement and security for its citizens and everyone on its territory.
The same applies to the needs of the planet. We hope for and expect the same behaviour and attitudes to save a planet that suffers abuses of all kinds, such as overexploitation and excess production and consumption. Beyond our individual sovereignties, we must be compelled to work together on a plan to meet the needs of countries and the planet. We must meet food, water and energy needs — needs that I refer to as strategic — by considering current threats and future generations.
With regard to human rights, the SDGs remind us of them every day through the targets set.
Our country believes that achieving the SDGs is the most concrete and reliable way to ensure respect for human rights. That is why our country strives to mobilize, through various strategies, resources that should enable our citizens to have access to
-	an adequate food system with school canteens throughout the country,
-	quality education for life,
-	health care via the system of insurance for the strengthening of human
capital, which protects the poorest,
-	drinking water, by expanding our distribution networks,
-	energy, by expanding our electricity network and sources of clean energy.
Today, thanks to the successful issuance of SDG Euro bonds, our country has been able to mobilize most of the resources needed to achieve the majority of the SDGs.
At the political level, with the reform of the party system, the regular organization of elections, good governance and the fight against corruption, Benin ensures that its citizens enjoy their human rights.
Mr. President,
The progress made by our country has been tangible, palpable and concrete in recent years. We, there-fore, believe that we deserve to be a member of the Human Rights Council for the period 2022-2024 in order to share our experience in the area of protecting and promoting human rights.
This platform is, therefore, a solemn opportunity for me to recall that our country’s candidacy has already been formally endorsed by the African Union.
With this support from our neighbours, we also invite all member countries of the United Nations to support Benin’s candidacy during the elections that will take place in New York in October 2021.
Mr. President,
Finally, with respect to revitalizing the United Nations, it is crucial to reform the institution so as to guarantee its foundation of equality, justice and solidarity among Member States. Times have changed, the world has evolved. Our institution must also evolve and adapt to modern times.
We appeal to the spirit of consensus to make the United Nations a modern, free and fair institution.
Meanwhile, my country reaffirms its support for diplomatic initiatives that seek to create a viable Palestinian State, with full international sovereignty, living in peace with the State of Israel.
Benin also supports the efforts of the United Nations to find a lasting solution to the situation concerning Western Sahara.
Lastly, my country stands in solidarity with the resolution adopted by the 34th Summit of the African Union in February 2021, in Addis Ababa, on the economic blockade imposed on Cuba by the United States of America. We reiterate the need for the United States to take all necessary measures to end the blockade in the name of promoting peace and development.
Benin therefore calls for the normalization of relations between Cuba and the United States — two countries that are friends of Benin.
Since we must live in hope, we expect that the various calls made here will be heard by all to ensure the advent of a modern, united, free, fair, secure and prosperous world for all.
I thank you.