The United Nations, I need hardly recall, has a vocation to lead the peoples of the world towards collective wellbeing and prosperity, towards justice, peace, security and development, in line with its Charter. The United Nations remains, after all, the only Organization that can bring together all nations for effective collective action aimed at mitigating the consequences of the various and varied scourges that could destabilize whole swaths of humankind, if not all of humankind.
Even in the most difficult times in our common history, the United Nations has always held high the torch of universal solidarity. The Organization has always been able to mobilize the international community in the quest for lasting solutions when faced with collective danger. That is precisely why my country, the Republic of the Congo, has very deep faith and trust in the Organization, which has such a unique historical trajectory.
Unfortunately, we are compelled to acknowledge that despite its praiseworthy commitment to peace throughout the world, despite its tireless advocacy for the well-being of many, every year millions of people throughout the world die of hunger and as a result of lack of medication, and millions of others continue to die from perfectly curable diseases such as typhoid and malaria. Today we are talking about billions of people who cannot access vaccines to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which will certainty leave an indelible mark on our century. The pandemic is a fearful common enemy against which we have to pool our intelligence and our forces. It is only by standing shoulder to shoulder, in a spirit of solidarity, that we will be able to overcome the virus, which threatens the very existence of human life. And as I say this, I am thinking especially of the inhabitants of this wonderful city of New York, who are hosting us today and who have suffered from it so.
In my country, the moment the first COVID cases appeared, the Government forcefully took the bull by the horns. To date, the Government has fully vaccinated about 180,000 people, or approximately 5.21 per cent of the population. We wish to take this opportunity to thank all the friendly countries and all the technical and financial partners that facilitated my country’s access to vaccines through direct donations and under various initiatives such as the Coronavirus Disease Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility and the African Vaccine Acquisition.
Six years ago, in 2015, in this very Hall, we were swept up by a common impetus of solidarity and decided to include the fight against poverty and the promotion of health for everyone among our main challenges. We committed ourselves to working together to step up education for the most disadvantaged segments of society throughout the world. The Sustainable Development Goals that we adopted at that time thus represented the basis for the comprehensive development of all peoples throughout the world, with the lofty ambition of ensuring that no one is left behind.
Unfortunately, the gaps between rich and poor countries have only become wider. In many of the regions in the world, unacceptable inequalities have compounded poverty. That is a genuine challenge that has a bearing on the very credibility of the United Nations in the eyes of the peoples of the world.
The Government of the Republic of the Congo welcomes the return of the United States to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which is a major instrument bringing together the international community in the fight against climate-change-related imbalances. Within the framework of the implementation of resolution 75/17, on the protection of the global climate for present and future generations of humankind, the Republic of the Congo has made significant progress, placing special emphasis on adaptation.
Scientific studies are being conducted that focus on the vulnerability of forests and fragile ecosystems, on agricultural practices in the savanna and on the fight against erosion and cyclical floods. Those studies are aimed at providing specific responses to the challenge of climate change and strengthening the capacities for adaptation and resilience of local populations given the rapidly increasing environmental changes that we have seen.
In terms of preserving biodiversity, in February my country launched the Biodev 2030 initiative, whose goal is to encourage joint private-sector and civil- society funding for projects relating to preserving biodiversity. I reiterate here the appeal made by the Republic of the Congo to various development partners to invest significantly in sustainable development and in the effective management of the peat bog in the Congo basin, which, according to scientists, could be a storehouse for several billion tons of carbon.
For many years Africa has been trying to make its voice heard so as to ensure the rectification of what everyone agrees is a historic injustice against this part of the world. The recurrence of conflict on the continent calls more than ever for better international governance. Indeed, how can we manage, within the United Nations and its Security Council, the various crises and conflicts in Africa without the effective participation of the continent, where more than 60 per cent of peacekeeping operations are taking place. It would seem to me that there exist here both an inconsistency and an anachronism that we must address.
That is why it seems vital to us that account be taken of the African concerns expressed through the relevant Sirte Declaration and the historic Ezulwini Consensus, to which we remain firmly committed. Africa today is a key player in the world and must take its rightful place in terms of rights and obligations; it must take its rightful place within a reformed Security Council — a Council that is more transparent, more dynamic, more democratic and more clearly representative of the wonderful diversity of our world.
The anachronism that I was just referring to — the African claim to a seat on the Security Council — dovetails with the embargo imposed on Cuba, an embargo that has been going on since last century and which has inflicted terrible suffering on the people of that country. It is long past time for the embargo to be lifted. Once again, from this lofty rostrum, we call for temperance and wisdom on the part of American leaders, especially those who are of the current generation, most of whom have nothing to do with this remnant of the cold war.
Among the major challenges facing the international community today is the Libyan crisis. In the course of recent months considerable advances have been made in that regard thanks to the joint efforts of the United Nations, the African Union, the European Union, the League of Arab States, the neighbouring States and actors of goodwill. Those efforts were boosted by the Berlin Process, which created fresh impetus in the quest for solutions to the crisis.
But in order to ensure that the general elections planned for the upcoming months take place — elections that are awaited as a turning point in the history of the country — all stakeholders must be aligned and persevere in the implementation of the decisions emanating from Berlin. Those decisions have been followed up regularly and closely in Munich, in Geneva, in Cairo, in Tunis, in Oyo and in Algiers, and even here in New York a few days ago. Those decisions essentially concern the consolidation of the ceasefire, the respect of the arms embargo, unifying the military and financial institutions and a gradual, consensual and balanced withdrawal of foreign fighters, obviously without any prejudice to neighbouring countries.
The African Union High-Level Committee on Libya, chaired by President Denis Sassou Nguesso, on whose behalf I have the honour to be speaking, believes that there should be no ambiguity on those points. It is the Committee’s view that as we approach the date of the elections, the Libyan people must imperatively intensify the dialogue among themselves, transcend the accumulated rancour and learn to forgive one another. They must break down the sectarian barriers that on occasion keep them imprisoned and establish everywhere bridges and pathways between tribes, customary authorities and other religious communities. We believe that only in this way can a definitive chance be given to peace and a new historical perspective opened for that country.
For his part, in line with his pan-African convictions, President Denis Sassou Nguesso reiterates, through me, his commitment to continuing with his mission at the head of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya. He reiterates also his commitment to accompanying all Libyan brothers all the way on the path of inclusive dialogue, national reconciliation and the reconstruction of their beautiful country.
To conclude, I would like to welcome the strong resolve that we, the humble servants of our nations, allied from generation to generation since 1945, have always had and shared within this form of global responsibility, a will that is renewed time and again from this lofty rostrum to work towards a humankind that is more generous and stands shoulder to shoulder; and a will that is reaffirmed time and again to work faithfully for a world of peace and justice, a world of freedom and equality, a world where prosperity is truly shared among nations.