As we approach the second anniversary of the beginning of the worst catastrophe in almost a century, humankind has not yet been able to bring this terrible chapter of the coronavirus disease pandemic to an end. Nevertheless, we come to this forum with the hope of renewing and strengthening the bonds of cooperation and solidarity as fraternal nations.
This community of States faces enormous challenges that can be effectively addressed only through renewed multilateralism. Indeed, in the face of pandemics, the climate emergency, the technological revolution and the need to articulate a new paradigm for the welfare state, it is vital to strengthen unity and cooperation among all nations.
We have a historic responsibility to leave the world a better place than when we found it, but that is possible only if we take seriously the global transition towards a new ecological, sustainable, inclusive and equitable production model, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That change is possible only through a global and multilateral effort that guarantees the rule of law, human rights and the well-being of all peoples, leaving no one behind.
Despite the unfortunate scenario created by the pandemic, our Government has promoted a free vaccination plan, the success of which can be seen in tangible results and telling statistics: 57 per cent of the eligible population is fully vaccinated, approximately 70 per cent has received at least one dose and more than 10 per cent has received a third dose, with a case fatality rate of 1.14 per cent — one of the lowest in the world.
In line with our vision of shared responsibility to find a way out of the pandemic and because we have an inventory of vaccines that has allowed us to do so, we have donated, in a spirit of solidarity, some 820,000 doses to other countries in our region, as we are convinced that we will be safe only once we are all vaccinated.
However, although we have begun to emerge from the pandemic, that will not be enough to overcome the current economic and financial crisis. In the interest of maintaining social peace, we are called upon to find a solution to the enormous debt that middle-income countries have been forced to incur in order to cope with the economic and social havoc wrought by the pandemic. There is currently no mechanism for accessing concessional finance that would allow us to solve the liquidity crisis. To address that challenge, we are forced to seek innovative yet also urgent solutions.
Recently, the Board of Governors of the International Monetary Fund provided an allocation equivalent to $650 billion in special drawing rights, with the objective of strengthening global liquidity. States members of the International Monetary Fund received those funds according to their country quotas. That meant that a large proportion of those resources went to developed countries — precisely those that need them the least.
In order to resolve that unjust situation, industrialized countries should devote those resources to the creation of a mechanism to channel the quotas they received to low- and middle-income countries, giving them access to concessional funds. Multilateral financial institutions would play a key role in such a mechanism, ensuring that those resources reach the countries that truly need them. That initiative would have a very positive impact on international financial markets, as it would make debt more sustainable and
strengthen confidence in our economies while also improving the cost of financing.
The Government over which I have the honour to preside is firmly convinced that democracy is the political system that best guarantees the dignity, well-being and happiness of the people and that it can be sustained only if it is deepened and broadened. For that reason, I am proud that we have called all sectors of national life in our country to an open and pluralistic dialogue to achieve reforms that contribute to strengthening the social and democratic rule of law in the Dominican Republic.
In that connection, the Dominican Republic is a firm defender of democracy and human rights, which implies strengthening checks and balances of the executive branch, such as an independent judiciary, the decisions of which are widely respected by all. Our Government is committed to ensuring the independence of the Public Prosecutor’s Office and other oversight bodies, as well as the reform of the national police, in order to guarantee the rule of law and citizen security.
In the same vein, our fundamental purpose is to defend the public sector: the common heritage of Dominicans. That requires fully transparent management, which is one of the achievements that gives us the greatest satisfaction. In the midst of the current difficult circumstances, our citizens continue to demand that we act courageously against corruption, and we have been demonstrating our conviction in that regard with clear, precise and forceful actions.
Regarding the economy, I am pleased to note that even in the midst of such difficulties, our country has reason to be optimistic. We are forecasted to end the year 2021 with an economic growth rate of 10 per cent and to maintain a growth rate of more than 5 per cent in the years to come.
I would like to suggest three actions that we consider urgent and necessary for our region and our country.
First, the Dominican Republic, as a small island developing State, is one of the countries that produces the least greenhouse- gas emissions but suffers the most from the effects of climate change. Now is the time to promote a global transformation of the economy that aligns with development levels and ensures that the required standards do not impose excessive burdens leading to additional costs that harm competitiveness and the production of goods and services. It is also just and necessary that the enormous investments required to restore our natural resources affected by global warming should be paid for by the countries that have generated the most carbon dioxide.
The second action concerns the fact that the current financial crisis and increased levels of indebtedness caused by the pandemic cannot be resolved solely by increasing taxes in our respective countries, given the attendant social pressures and potential for upheaval. We must be creative, and we are convinced that, at no cost to their Governments, the multilateral and bilateral financial institutions can provide credit facilities through transparent, accessible, concerted and non-discriminatory mechanisms that will help countries in difficulty to quickly regain financial sustainability and access to international financial markets, with preferential rates that are not affected by the country risk index.
Our third and last recommended action concerns Haiti. Since we took office, we have warned repeatedly that the situation in Haiti could potentially spill over its borders and lead to insecurity in the region. That is why this community of nations must urgently, once and for all, attend to the Haitian crisis as one of its highest priorities, requiring ongoing follow-up. We have taken note of the fact that some Governments have recently adopted measures to deal with the consequences of the Haitian crisis. For years, our country has had to face the consequences of that tragic situation every day virtually alone. We are convinced that no unilateral action will be sufficient to overcome it.
It is imperative that we state in the strongest and most emphatic terms possible that the international community must not and cannot abandon the Haitian people when the current levels of insecurity are leading to their self-destruction. I want to say this today as sincerely as possible without the niceties of diplomatic language. Given the current division within the Haitian leadership and the dangerous presence of criminal gangs that control a significant part of their territory, the Haitians people will not by themselves be able to bring peace to their country, much less guarantee the necessary conditions for establishing a minimum level of order.
Consequently, the most important and urgent issue is bringing about security in Haiti. Only after that has been achieved can free, fair and credible elections be held. Subsequently, with a new Government as a legitimate
interlocutor, a truly comprehensive economic and social development plan will have to be prepared, with all required resources and the support and solidarity of the international community, for it is no longer possible to think only about humanitarian measures.
At this solemn gathering, I would like to state that the Dominican Republic has shown and will continue to show the solidarity and collaboration that the Haitian people deserve, but I also reiterate that there is not now and never will be a Dominican solution to the Haiti crisis.
The number of challenges facing our States is significant with regard to building a world under the banner of equality. However, we must not face them alone. Unity and multilateralism are the best ways to advance towards the goal without leaving anyone behind. I firmly believe that with every passing day, the leadership of the United Nations will continue to be revitalized and strengthened. The Dominican State reaffirms its commitment to the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations — peace, human dignity, justice, social progress and freedom. Let us move firmly towards a renewed and more equitable welfare state. We cannot fail our peoples. We cannot fail history.
