His Excellency President of the UN General Assembly,
His Excellency UN Secretary-General,
Excellencies, Leaders of UN Member Countries.
The world community looks towards the UN General Assembly to provide answers to major global concerns.
When will the people be free from the pandemic? When will the economy recover and grow inclusively? How to sustain the planet for future generations? And when will the world be free from conflict, terrorism, and war?
Given the recent global developments, there are many things that we need to do together.
First, we must bring hope that we can tackle the COVID-19 pandemic swiftly, fairly, and equally.
We know that “no one is safe until everyone is”. The capacity and pace among countries in tackling COVID-19, including in vaccinations, differs widely. Politicization and discrimination towards vaccine continues to take place.
We must solve these issues with concrete steps.
In the future, we must reorganize global health security architecture, global health security system.
New mechanisms are required to mobilize global health resources, which includes financing, vaccines, medicines, medical equipment, as well as healthcare workers worldwide, quickly and fairly.
We need to establish a standardized global health protocol in cross-border activities, such as vaccines criteria, test results, and other medical conditions.
Second, global economic recovery can only be attained if the pandemic is under control and countries join hands in helping one another.
Indonesia, along with other developing countries, embrace quality investments. Those that open up many job opportunities, transfer of technology, human resources development, and contributes to sustainability.
Third, Indonesia’s commitment toward climate resilience, low carbon development and green technology is firm and clear.
However, energy and technology transformation process must facilitate the participation of developing countries in development of industries and become technology producers.
The COVID-19 pandemic reminds us of the importance of diversification of production centres across the world.
Fourth, we must be stern in fighting intolerance, conflicts, terrorism, and war. Peace in diversity and the protection of women’s and minority rights must be upheld.
Concerns on the marginalization of women and violence in Afghanistan, Palestine’s elusive independence, and the political crisis in Myanmar, must be our common agenda.
The leaders of ASEAN met in Jakarta and agreed on the Five Points Consensus, of which its implementation requires the full commitment of the Myanmar military.
The great hope of the global community must be met with concrete steps and tangible results.
These responsibilities fall upon our shoulders. The global community awaits. It is our duty to provide hope for the world’s future.
Excellencies,
In 2022, Indonesia will assume the G20 Presidency, under the theme of “Recover Together ... Recover Stronger”.
Indonesia strive for the G-20 to work for the benefit of all, developed and developing countries, north and south, big and small, Archipelagic countries and small island states in the Pacific as well as vulnerable groups that must be prioritized.
Inclusiveness will be the main priority during Indonesia’s Presidency. This is Indonesia’s commitment to show that no one is left behind.
Green and sustainable economy will also be one of the priorities.
Indonesia is aware of our strategic place on climate change. Thus, we will continue to work hard to fulfil our commitments.
In 2020, Indonesia reduced its forest fires by 82 per cent, compared to the previous year. Deforestation rates have dropped significantly, the lowest in 20 years.
At the global level, Indonesia will put forward burden sharing, not burden shifting.
In facing these challenging global agendas, Indonesia reiterates its hope and support towards multilateralism.
It is imperative for us to safeguard an effective multilateralism, with concrete work and results.
Let us work together ... to Recover Together ... Recover Stronger.
I thank you.
