First of all, I would like to formally congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the office of President of the General Assembly. Your becoming President is a matter of pride for all developing countries, in particular small island developing States.
For the past one and a half years, the world has been grappling with the worst pandemic it has seen in 100 years. I pay tribute to all those who have lost their lives during the deadly coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and express my condolences to their families.
I represent a country that is proud to be known as the mother of democracy. We have a great tradition of democracy that dates back thousands of years. On 15 August, India began the seventy-fifth year of its independence. Our diversity accounts for the nature of our strong democracy. India is a country that counts dozens of languages and hundreds of dialects, distinct ways of life and cuisines. That is the best example of a vibrant democracy. The strength of our democracy is demonstrated by the fact that a little boy who at one time used to help his father at his tea stall at a railway station is today addressing the General Assembly for the fourth time as Prime Minister of India.
I will soon have spent 20 years serving my people as Head of Government — as the longest-serving Chief Minister of Gujarat and then as Prime Minister for the past seven years. Based on my own experience, yes, democracy can deliver. Yes, democracy has delivered.
Today is the birthday of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya, who propounded the philosophy of Ekatma Manav Darshan, which translates into integral humanism or the development journey undertaken together and the expansion from the self to the universe, whereby the self moves from the individual to society, the nation and all humankind. This philosophy is dedicated to the concept of Antyodaya — the modern- day equivalent of leaving no one behind. It is with that principle in mind that India today is moving forward on the path of integrated equitable development. Our priority is that development should be all-inclusive, all- pervasive, universal and one that nurtures all.
In the past seven years, India has brought more than 430 million people who were previously unbanked into the banking system. Today more than 360 million people who previously could not even have imagined it was possible now have the security of insurance coverage. By giving more than 500 million people free treatment in hospitals, India has provided them with access to quality health services. By building 30 million proper homes, India has made homeless families homeowners.
Polluted water is a very big problem, not just for India but for the entire world, in particular for poor and developing countries. In order to address that challenge in India, we have launched a broad campaign to ensure that piped clean water reaches more than 170 million homes.
Reputed institutions of the world have said that, for the development of any country, people must have property rights to their homes and land — that is, ownership records are a must. In the most developed countries, there are many people who do not have property rights to their homes or land. Today we use drones in India to map more than 600,000 villages. By doing so, we give people digital records of their homes and land, which will not only reduce property disputes but also give people increased access to credit and bank loans.
Today every sixth person in the world is Indian. When Indians make progress, it also gives impetus to the development of the world. When India grows, the world grows. When India reforms, the world transforms.
The science- and technology-based innovations taking place in India can make a big contribution to the world. Both the scalability of our technology solutions and their cost-effectiveness are unparalleled. More than 3.5 billion transactions are completed every month in India through our unified payment interface. India’s vaccine delivery platform, CoWIN, offers digital support to register the administration of millions of vaccine doses in a single day.
India, which puts into practice the principle of Seva Parmo Dharma, meaning “service is the highest religion”, today spares no effort in vaccine development and manufacturing, despite its limited resources. I would like to inform the General Assembly that India has developed the world’s first DNA vaccine, which can be administered to anyone above the age of 12. Another vaccine — a messenger RNA vaccine — is in the final stages of development. Indian scientists are also working on the development of a nasal vaccine against COVID-19.
Deeply conscious of its responsibility towards humankind, India has resumed the process of providing vaccines to those who need it in the world. Today I also extend an invitation to vaccine manufacturers from across the world to come and make vaccines in India.
All of us are well aware of how important technology is in the lives of people today. However, in this ever- changing world, it is equally important to ensure that technology is applied with democratic values. No matter which country the doctors, innovators, engineers and managers of Indian origin live in, our democratic values inspire them to continue serving humankind. That is indeed a spirit we have seen during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also taught the world another important lesson — that the global economy needs to be diversified even further. To that end, the expansion of global value chains is necessary. Our Atmanirbhar Bharat, or “self-reliant India”, movement is inspired by that very spirit.
India is becoming a democratic and reliable partner for global industrial diversification, and in that context has struck a better balance between both economy and ecology. I am sure that everyone here is also proud of the efforts made by India on climate change as compared to those made by large developed nations. Today India has advanced with great speed towards its target of generating 450 gigawatts of renewable energy by 2030. We have also started to work on making India the world’s largest green hydrogen hub.
We are answerable to future generations when they ask what was done by the people whose responsibility it was to give direction to the world when it was time to take decisions. Today the world faces an increased threat of regressive thinking and extremism. In such a situation, the entire world must make scientific, rational and progressive thinking the basis for development.
In order to strengthen a science-based approach, India is promoting experience-based learning. Thousands of Atal Tinkering Laboratories have been set up in Indian schools. We have also set up incubators, and a strong start-up ecosystem has been developed. On the occasion of the seventy-fifth year of its independence, when we celebrate the Azadi Ka Amrit festival, India will launch 75 satellites made by Indian students in schools and colleges.
On the other hand, countries with regressive thinking are using terrorism as a political tool. Those countries must understand that terrorism represents an equally grave threat to them. It is absolutely essential to ensure that Afghanistan’s territory not be used to spread terrorism or for terrorist attacks. We also need to be alert and ensure that no country tries to take advantage of the delicate situation there and use it as a tool for its own selfish interests. At this time, the people of Afghanistan, particularly its women, children and minorities, need help. We must fulfil our duty by providing them with that help.
Our oceans are also our shared heritage. That is why we must bear in mind the need to, use and not abuse, ocean resources. Our oceans are also the lifeline of international trade. We must protect them from the race towards expansion and exclusion. The international community must speak with one voice to strengthen a rules-based world order. The broad consensus reached in the Security Council during India’s presidency shows the world the way forward in maritime security.
Hundreds of years ago, Chanakya, the great diplomat of India, said that, when the right action is not taken at the right time, then it is time itself that causes the action to fail. If the United Nations wants to remain relevant, it will need to improve its effectiveness and enhance its reliability. Today all kinds of questions are being raised about the United Nations. We have heard such questions raised in relation to the climate crisis as well as in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. The proxy wars being waged in many parts of the world, terrorism and the recent Afghan crisis have further highlighted the seriousness of those questions.
In terms of both the origins of COVID-19 and the rankings on the ease of doing business, global governance institutions have damaged the credibility they had built — the result of decades of hard work. It is essential that we persevere in strengthening the United Nations in order to safeguard global order, global laws and global values.
I would like to end my address with the words of Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore: “Boldly proceed on your path of good deeds; may you overcome all weaknesses and doubts.” In the current context, that message is as relevant to every responsible nation as it is to the United Nations. I am confident that our efforts will enhance peace and harmony in the world and make the world healthy, safe and prosperous.