Mr. President,
Excellencies, Secretary-General of the United Nations, ladies and gentlemen,
At the outset, I should like to congratulate Abdulla Shahid on his election as President of the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly. I wish him success in performing his noble duties. I would also like to pay tribute to the tireless efforts of your predecessor, Volkan Bozkir, and the aplomb with which he presided over the previous session, against the backdrop of an unprecedented pandemic.
The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates its congratulations to His Excellency Antonio Guterres on his election to a second term as Secretary-General. We express our full confidence in and support for his efforts to achieve the Organization’s overarching aims. In these difficult circumstances, we eagerly look forward to the emergence of a more equitable and effective international order that meets the aspirations of our peoples for collective health security and sustainable development.
Mr. President,
No State has been spared the impact of a pandemic that has severely tested our national capabilities and governance as well as our collective will as an international community, threatening to destroy everything that we have accomplished over decades. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has exacerbated inequalities in unprecedented ways and given rise to new inequalities among and within nations.
The political, socioeconomic, security and environmental impacts of the pandemic have reminded us of our fragility as human beings. The pandemic has wrought havoc with territorial boundaries and national priorities; disrupted the production, consumption and distribution of resources, and even exposed gaps in the medical, employment and social protection systems.
At the international level, the pandemic has exposed many deficiencies in multilateral governance. At a time when national policies have been at the forefront of global efforts to confront the pandemic and curb its spread, it is regrettable that multilateral action has fallen short.
While countries have indeed been aware that their fates were interlinked in combating the spread of the virus, that awareness has been expressed only in political statements that met with a consensus but failed to materialize as an effective system of international cooperation.
The aim here is not to criticize multilateral action, but instead to assess rationally and objectively the tangible and practical action that we, the States Members of the United Nations, have taken. The pandemic crisis has also been a comprehensive real-life test of the effectiveness of the international system; our responsibility is therefore a historic one.
Is it reasonable and acceptable for the United Nations to emerge from the greatest threat to human security since the Organization was established in the same state it was in at the beginning of 2020?
In the words of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God grant him victory, the United Nations is “the living conscience of humanity and the cornerstone of a new world order. Its pillars are peace, comprehensive security and common development, informed by the values of equality, tolerance, democracy and fraternity”. Therefore, we must work together to establish a new world order that will be a platform for effective joint action, action that enables us to move beyond statements of intent or intellectual argument to achieve transformational mobilization, on the basis of a practical road map that enhances every aspect of collective security and rises to current and emerging challenges.
We believe that multilateral action should not remain a language spoken only by Governments, inaudible to our peoples. Instead, it must be the lever of broad and pragmatic alliances that bring together States, the private sector, civil society and academia. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that there is an urgent need for pragmatic multilateral action whose legitimacy is rooted in the effective realization of the rights of citizens to security, health and development.
Mr. President,
The bid to deliver vaccines, our last line of defence against the pandemic, is in fact an opportunity to assert our will and demonstrate our ability to infuse multilateral action with a new impetus. While the tremendous work done by scientists and researchers to develop and test safe and effective vaccines is worthy of note, we emphasize in the strongest terms that the ultimate goal remains to ensure universal access to the vaccine, given that it is the common property of humankind, as well as to ensure the equitable distribution thereof in all countries and societies.
Equitable distribution of the vaccine is far more than an ethical obligation. It is a prerequisite for the collective security that our Organization was established to guarantee. Administering vaccines at diverging rates can only bring about a temporary recovery that will inevitably be followed by a setback, prolonging the crisis. When vaccines are scarce in any given region, it is only a matter of time before that region becomes a hotspot from which the virus — be it the known variants or mutations — will spread widely, with dire consequences for national economies and the well-being of societies. As King Mohammed VI said in July 2020 on Throne Day, “It is our duty not only to address the pandemic, but also to address its social and economic implications, with a comprehensive, forward-looking perspective that will allow us to draw beneficial lessons from this period”.
The Kingdom of Morocco salutes the tireless work of the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and United Nations agencies to ensure universal and equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines and treatment. Morocco also expresses its support for the Only Together campaign launched by the Secretary-Genera, which calls for vaccines to be made accessible to all.
However, that initiative should serve as an opportunity to focus seriously and objectively on the issue of mutual recognition of available vaccines and of those that have yet to be manufactured, on the basis of internationally agreed scientific, health and ethical standards rather than political or marketing calculations.
My country looks forward to enabling WHO to make optimal use of available resources and mechanisms in carrying out its mission to the best of its ability, including by monitoring emerging health threats, as part of the One Health approach.
Morocco, which is in favour of drafting, under United Nations auspices, an international treaty on epidemics, intends to organize an international conference on pandemic preparedness and response in 2022, in cooperation with the Republic of Rwanda, WHO and the World Bank. The aim is to unify international efforts to strengthen the capacity of States to cope with epidemics and prepare for emergencies.
Guided by the noble directives of his Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God grant him victory, the Kingdom of Morocco has been carrying out an ambitious project to manufacture COVID-19 vaccines within the fill-finish industry. In addition to bolstering the health sovereignty of the Kingdom, this ambitious initiative also contributes to consolidating the health security of African countries and bring their vaccination rates closer to the global average. This is how Morocco implements its African solidarity policy.
The African continent’s woefully and unacceptably low rate of access to vaccines — at just under 2 per cent — serves as a powerful incentive for collective action. Africa must become the top priority of the global health strategy, along with national development assistance policies. The world owes it to Africa!
Mr. President,
Although the pandemic currently tops the list of global challenges, it will not diminish our interest in such broad issues as migration, counter-terrorism and climate change.
While the consequences of the pandemic have also eclipsed the issue of immigration and human movement, the Kingdom’s serious and sustained engagement with the issue remains unchanged. Resolute and steadfast, Morocco continues to implement its national strategy — the first of its kind in the region — on migration and asylum. The strategy is based on the monarchy’s insightful vision of migration issues, informed by humane and responsible governance grounded in solidarity.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God grant him victory, has been recognized as a leader on migration issues in the African Union. Morocco hosted the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration in Marrakesh in December 2018. In late 2020, the capital city of Rabat became the headquarters of the first African Migration Observatory in the African Union.
Along with the proven commitment of Morocco to the work of the Global Counterterrorism Forum, which it has co-chaired since 2016, the country’s active involvement in counter-terrorism efforts have include the opening of a United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism programme office in Rabat. The choice of Morocco to host this important United Nations office constituted an explicit recognition of the Kingdom as a capable partner in combating this scourge and as a haven of security in its region and continent.
Morocco has been actively involved in promoting peaceful coexistence and dialogue between cultures and religions. It launched the initiative that led to the General Assembly’s adoption by consensus last July of a resolution proclaiming 18 June as the International Day for Countering Hate Speech.
The involvement of Morocco in local, regional and international efforts to address the effects of climate change has been guided by the proactive vision of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, as the country embarks on a plan to shift towards the use of renewable energy and diversify sources of clean energy. The Kingdom of Morocco has voluntarily set the ambitious target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 45.5 per cent by 2030, after raising its initial reduction target from 42 per cent.
Mr. President,
The trying circumstances left in the wake of the pandemic have not deterred Morocco from continuing to pursue its development efforts, spearheaded by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God grant him victory, to allow the country to progress and its people to prosper. His Majesty has issued directives to hold large workshops for reflection, broad research and inclusive participatory action. That initiative led to the establishment of a new development model that will be implemented over the next 14 years. This ambitious national project overlaps with the Sustainable Development Goals and even exceeds them in certain areas.
The model has laid the creative foundations of a new development doctrine and labour principles informed by trust, mobilization and responsibility, in order to free up capacities and create conditions conducive to a more open, innovative and competitive economy; human capital that is stronger and better qualified to take on the future; greater inclusion, especially for women and young people; and more resilient institutions capable of coping with development and environmental challenges.
In line with the noble directives issued by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God grant him victory, the guidelines of the new development model will serve as the basis of a charter agreed by all national forces.
Mr. President,
Peacekeeping remains one of the pillars of the United Nations. We take this opportunity to hail the Blue Helmets, especially during the pandemic, and to lament the loss of those who have made the supreme sacrifice in service of the noble values and principles of the United Nations.
Moroccan forces are currently deployed as United Nations peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan. The country is also contributing to the effort to adapt peacekeeping operations to contemporary challenges, per the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative launched during the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, in 2022 Morocco and France will organize the second Ministerial Conference on Peacekeeping in the Francophone Area, which hosts roughly half of all United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Morocco is the Chair of the First Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, presiding over that important committee on disarmament and international security for the first time. That Morocco was selected to represent Africa makes it clear that the country is regarded within the Organization as a committed and credible actor in international efforts to combat the nuclear and conventional arms races and that Moroccan efforts to achieve peace, security and regional and global stability are also recognized.
Mr. President,
Since the Kingdom of Morocco gained its independence, support for regional and global stability has been at the heart of its diplomatic creed. Morocco remains committed to reaching a definitive settlement of the regional conflict over the Moroccan Sahara, ensuring full respect for its territorial integrity and national sovereignty.
As you know, legislative, regional and local elections were held on 8 September 2021 in the Moroccan Sahara region, as they were elsewhere in the Kingdom. Electoral participation in the Moroccan Sahara was the highest nationwide, at 63 per cent. The electoral process took place in an atmosphere of mobilization and democratic organization, in full compliance with international standards, highlighting the calm and tranquillity of the Sahara region.
The Moroccan Saharan population’s enthusiastic participation attests to its commitment to the territorial integrity of the Kingdom and undeniable desire to engage fully and effectively in implementing the new model for the development of the southern provinces launched by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God grant him victory, in 2015.
From this podium, Morocco reiterates that it stands ready to continue to cooperate with the United Nations as part of the Secretary-General’s efforts to reach a realistic, practical, lasting and consensual political solution, ensuring full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Morocco.
The only way to achieve such a solution is for Algeria to bear full responsibility in the series of political round-table talks, inasmuch as it has been the party responsible for creating and prolonging the conflict. The autonomy initiative proposed by Morocco in 2007 remains the only prospect for a definitive political solution to this contrived regional dispute.
Morocco also expresses its grave concern at the tragic humanitarian situation of the population of the Tindouf camps. The host country, Algeria, has abdicated its responsibilities and ceded them to a separatist armed group, in flagrant violation of international humanitarian law. We call on the international community to take action to compel the host country to abide by its treaty obligations, in particular, to allow the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to register and count that population, as the Security Council has repeatedly called on the host country to do.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom of Morocco, motivated by history, the shared destiny that binds it to Libya and the positive momentum generated by the Libyan Political Agreement of Skhirat, is still working to help reach a peaceful solution to the conflict in that country.
Under the noble leadership of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God grant him victory, Morocco will always stand with the legitimate Libyan institutions and will support international efforts to resolve that Maghreb country’s crisis, in line with the agreements reached by the various Libyan parties.
Morocco remains firmly convinced that the crisis in Libya can only be resolved by Libyans themselves, without foreign intervention or agendas. The Libyan dialogue is the most effective means of meeting the Libyan people’s aspirations for stability, national reconciliation and development.
Morocco believes that it is crucial that elections be organized in Libya as a decisive step on the path to achieving peace in that country. Morocco stands ready to provide assistance in coordination with all Libyan institutions.
With the same deeply rooted, robust and sustained commitment to peace in the Middle East, the Kingdom considers the cause of Palestine and the Holy City of Jerusalem to be among its top priorities and deems it equal in importance to the cause of Moroccan national unity.
The Kingdom of Morocco is hopeful that a just, comprehensive and sustainable peace will be reached in the Middle East, leading to the establishment of an independent State of Palestine, on its national territory within the borders of June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
Morocco believes that this hope remains contingent on the realization by all that neither party will be able to attain security until the other does.
To that end, all parties must make the courageous decision to agree to relaunch the peace process and put an end to all manner of violations, restrictions and provocations, which serve only to fuel hostility and undermine prospects for understanding and dialogue.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose sovereign, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, is the President of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, reiterates its firm and principled position regarding the importance of preserving the unique legal, historical and spiritual status of the Holy City. Owing to that status, the city is a land of coexistence among the followers of the monotheistic religions, an agent of rapprochement among peoples and of peace and stability in the region.
Convinced that peace begets peace, the Kingdom of Morocco is working to establish peaceful and sound relations with the State of Israel, in the hope of advancing the cause of peace in the region, enhancing regional security and providing new opportunities for the region as a whole, according to the tripartite declaration signed on 22 December 2020 before His Majesty King Mohammed VI.
Mr. President,
The time has come to take urgent, practical and coordinated action to strengthen the role of the United Nations as a global framework for international cooperation. In order to bring about profound changes in our international system, we need two things, namely, will and urgent intervention, that is, to induce States to act on their awareness of shared responsibility and to translate that awareness into an agenda driven by solidarity and effectiveness.
Resolute and in a spirit of earnest responsibility, the Kingdom of Morocco will continue to perform its role within the main organs of our Organization, thereby contributing to strengthening its credibility and effectiveness and expanding its influence.
May peace and God’s mercy be upon you.