Namibia joins other Member States in congratulating the President on his election to lead the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, convened under the theme “Building resilience through hope — to recover from COVID-19, rebuild sustainably, respond to the needs of the planet, respect the rights of people and revitalize the United Nations”. We would also like to commend Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his profound and moving statement (see A/76/PV.3) highlighting the many challenges the world is facing while imploring global leaders to act now to solve those problems. We have heard his clarion call loud and clear.
For the second year in a row, the world finds itself engulfed by the dark cloud of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which continues to claim thousands of lives daily. However, there is a light at the end of the tunnel. The global efforts to develop vaccines have been a scientific victory and a testament to human ingenuity. In just under a year the unexpected has happened. Several different vaccines have been tested and produced to be delivered to millions around the world. Unfortunately, the global roll-out of the vaccines has not been impervious to the scourge of inequality. Vaccine apartheid has resulted in significant disparities in terms of the roll-out and availability of vaccines, with many people in developing countries left out. It is a pity that we have a situation where in some countries citizens are at the stage of receiving booster shots while in others many are still waiting to receive their first doses of vaccine. Let us bear in mind that no one is safe unless we are all safe.
COVID-19 has affected poorer countries more acutely and unevenly. Faced with high levels of debt and no access to finance, developing countries are struggling to mitigate the severe effects of the crisis. Namibia, however, aims to deploy innovative approaches to ensure sustainable economic development in this volatile period of pandemic and climate change. Given our renewable resources such as solar and wind power, as well as the ocean, Namibia has decided to prioritize the development of green and blue economies. We are also well positioned through our recent membership in the High-level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy to design and champion a sustainable blue economy, which will grow our economic base and create much- needed jobs while also tackling climate change. Additionally, Namibia has made progress in incubating renewable energy assets in the form of green hydrogen
and ammonia as part of its energy order, in order to enable us to act in the best interests of our planet and its citizens.
Africa has come a long way from the days of the first wave of African leaders who paved the way towards independence. They were extraordinary personalities who forced us to fight for our independence. That first wave was followed by a second wave who were caught up in Cold War confusion, one-party States and military coups. Following the period of global conflict that was manifested in the form of the Cold War, a third wave of African leaders has ushered in an era defined by democratic elections and term limits. The first wave of African leaders were our founding fathers. The second were caught up in the Cold War confusion, and the third are those now in power who have come through regular elections and abide by term limits. But despite the fact that we have recently had a setback in two countries, unlike in the past, when others would tell Africans what to do, it has been Africans — in the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union — who have made decisions about this, ostracizing such leaders and demanding constitutional order. That is now the new Africa that we believe in, a new Africa that believes in constitutional order.
Namibia stands firm in its belief that there is no room for discrimination of any kind in this world. In that regard, we remain committed to the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, which embodies our firm determination as the international community to rid the world of the scourges of racism, xenophobia and related intolerance at the national, regional and international levels.
The question of Palestine, now in its seventy-third year since the Nakba, remains unresolved. On that crucial issue, Namibia wishes to amplify the Secretary- General’s statement, which said explicitly that the leaders on both sides should resume a meaningful dialogue, recognizing a two-State solution as the only pathway to a just and comprehensive peace. Similarly, after nearly 50 years the people of Western Sahara are still waiting to exercise their right to freedom and independence. Namibia welcomes the Secretary- General’s appointment of Mr. Alexander Ivanko as his Special Representative for Western Sahara. We hope he will devote his full attention to the matter to enable the people of Western Sahara to have the opportunity to exercise their right to self-determination without further delay.
In the same vein, in accordance with resolutions unanimously adopted by the General Assembly, we call for an end to the United States’ economic, commercial and financial embargo on Cuba. The people of Cuba deserve to pursue their development aspirations and attain economic freedom. We call on President Biden — who was an invaluable member of President Obama’s Administration, which sought a rapprochement between Washington and Havana — to rekindle the spirit of respect and peace between the United States and Cuba that President Obama pursued.
As a member of the African Union Committee of Ten Heads of State and Government, Namibia is committed to reform of the Security Council. We therefore call on all countries to support that reform in line with the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
As we continue to build back better, we have a collective responsibility to ensure the participation of women at all levels of governance and economic activity as a symbol of freedom and equality in society. Namibia believes that women’s participation and representation is central to equitable and sustainable development. We therefore continue to advocate for greater gender equality around the world and have set ourselves the challenge of leading by example in our policies, programmes and actions. We also take cognizance of the fact that our youth are the backbone of the global village and custodians of the keys to humankind’s future. Namibia therefore remains committed to supporting the development of our young people and promoting greater youth participation in all areas of society, since they have a critical role to play in promoting global peace and development. In illustration of our commitment to youth empowerment, my delegation includes two young ladies under age 30 — one of whom is only 25 years old — who are both deputy ministers. They, together with their peers, are the future.
We are facing one of the most critical periods in human history. Global peace, human dignity and the future of our global village are at stake. As we meet in this global parliament of humanity, we are called on by the citizens of our world to craft a collective way forward that will ensure that we recover from the devastation of COVID-19 and chart a way forward towards a brighter future. Although the task may seem
daunting, through unity of purpose we will prevail. For where there is unity, there is the hope of overcoming COVID-19. Where there is unity, people can return to rebuilding sustainably. Where there is unity, we can respond to the needs of the planet and respect the rights of all. Indeed, through unity, we will revitalize the United Nations, transforming it into a bastion of global democracy that will save the world from the scourge of war and reaffirm faith in the fundamental human rights, dignity and worth of each and every human being on this planet.
I always say, one Namibia, one nation. I say one Africa, one continent. I say one world, one universe.