Excellency, President Abdulla Shahid,
At the outset, it gives us pleasure to extend my congratulations to you and your friendly country, the Republic of Maldives on your election, as President of the Seventy-sixth Session of the United Nations General Assembly. We are confident that you are capable of conducting the work of this session with much wisdom and skill.
We also like to express our thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, His Excellency Volkan Bozkir of the friendly Republic of Turkey, for his efforts while presiding over the previous session.
We would also like to place on record our appreciation for the efforts of His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, wishing him every success in his second term of office, and assuring the Sultanate of Oman’s continued cooperation with him, and other Member States to achieve the noble aims of the United Nations, the foremost of which is the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. President,
Crises and challenges represent opportunities for countries in testing their readiness and enhancing capabilities. Despite the great challenges and changes inflicted by the novel coronavirus pandemic “COVID-19” on our daily lives; but thank goodness that did not discourage us from confronting those challenges, addressing their repercussions, and working toward recovery.
In the Sultanate of Oman, the availability of vaccines had a great impact in strengthening our national efforts to address this pandemic, and consolidating hope for its elimination and gradual return to normal life. My country has been able, through preventive measures and a national vaccination campaign for all targeted ages, to limit the spread of the epidemic, reduce the number of infections and deaths, and the rate of hospitalization, which has enabled the return of economic, social and commercial activities to normalcy, and opening of all travel and movement exits, while putting in place the necessary preventive measures.
As we continue our efforts to confront this pandemic, we call on the international community to enhance cooperation and solidarity, and we appeal to vaccine-producing and donor countries to do their utmost to ensure a fair distribution for all countries and individuals, particularly in less developed regions that suffer from limited facilities and medical capabilities, which would bring about international cooperation and societal solidarity, and ensure a decent life for human beings across the globe.
Bearing that in mind, we seize this opportunity to salute those in charge of health systems, especially in the first line of defence, in all countries of the world and international organizations for the enormous efforts and sacrifice that they are making for the sake of all mankind.
Under the wise leadership of His Majesty Sultan Haitham bin Tariq, the Sultanate of Oman continues to adhere to the established and main principles of its foreign policy, which are embodied in the policy of good-neighbourliness, noninterference in the internal affairs of others, respect for international laws and norms, enhance cooperation among States and opportunities for dialogue. We firmly believe that resolving differences in the spirit of reconciliation and tolerance is a civilized conduct that leads to better and more lasting results, than can be achieved through conflict. Simply put, dialogue is better than war.
We, in the Sultanate of Oman, are part of this interconnected world; we share interests and destiny with its people. We rejoice for its contentment and grieve for its impairment. Therefore, we strive with our full energy and capabilities to contribute in assisting peace issues at all regional and international levels. We are committed to our stances with honesty, objectivity, steadfastness on our values and principles, as well as a balanced and constructive approach in dealing with all issues.
From this standpoint, my country welcomed and supported the positive developments that resulted from the Al-Ula summit that was held in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and the success of the reconciliation efforts led by the brotherly State of Kuwait.
We also affirm our support for the just Palestinian Cause and the demands of the Palestinian people for independence and the establishment of their State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with international law, Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
With respect to the Yemeni crisis, my country is continuing its tireless endeavours, and working with the brotherly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, both the United Nations’ and American’s envoys for Yemen, and the concerned Yemeni parties with the aim of ending the war through a comprehensive and permanent ceasefire on all sides, and fully resuming humanitarian efforts, in order to provide for the needs of the brothers in Yemen. In particular, medication, health care, food, fuel and housing. We join our voice with everyone who believes in the inevitability of reaching a comprehensive political settlement to the existing crisis, in a way that restores security, stability, and normalcy to brotherly Yemen, while maintaining the security and interests of countries of the Region.
We would also like to express our hope that the Vienna talks on the Iranian nuclear program will lead to the desired consensus among all parties, because we firmly believe that this will be in the interest of the Region and the world.
Like the rest of the world, we have followed the recent developments in Afghanistan; we would, therefore, like to express our hope that all Afghan parties will work for reconciliation and give priority to the higher interests of the Afghan people and their aspirations for security, stability, economic and social development, and building positive relations with regional neighbours and the international community.
Mr. President,
My country condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and in the meantime, supports efforts and strategies to eradicate this haunting menace that contradicts religious and human values and morals, and threatens security and stability in the entire world.
In addition, the Sultanate of Oman calls for ending threats to international maritime trade and for full compliance with treaties, agreements and international law to ensure freedom of maritime navigation in a manner that secures the flow of trade among countries and enhances economic growth opportunities. We call upon all Member States to fulfil their commitments undertaken through treaties and agreements related to disarmament, in particular, those agreements and treaties relating to nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, in order to ensure global stability.
Mr. President,
My country has sought to translate its international commitment in achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 2030 (SDGs), by integrating its three economic and social axes, and the 17 SDGs into the Sultanate’s strategies and developmental plans. We also consider those SDGs, as key components of the Oman’s Vision 2040 and its implementation plans.
We are fully aware that the road to sustainable development is still long and bumpy, and that achieving the commitments we made depends on our ability to face challenges, which requires joint international and regional cooperation. In this context, we recognize that a renewed commitment to social justice represents the real basis for action at the national and international policy levels. Therefore, we welcome and support the investment and economic diversification programs, which are among the priorities of development plans in the Sultanate of Oman; thereby, contributing to the maximization and dissemination of benefits and opportunities for our partners and society.
Like other countries of the world, my country pays great attention to the risks of climate change that affect the ecological and agricultural systems, and the economic infrastructure. Hence, to confront climate change and limit its increasing effects, the Sultanate of Oman has implemented its Draft National Strategy for adapting to climate change and mitigating its effects. This strategy includes reports on the expected impacts of the most important sectors of development and the appropriate adaptation measures for them.
My country recently submitted its second Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) report to mitigate Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions, as part of its commitments to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The world is witnessing new transformations as a result of scientific and technological progress, which calls on us, once more, to emphasize the importance of strengthening the global- partnership in this field, so as to maximize the use of advanced technologies and keep pace with them, as part of the sustainable development goals, and face contemporary challenges, the most important of which are those that threaten the climate.
Mr. President,
There is no doubt that women have a great role alongside men in building a social fabric that ensures the sound education of young people, on whom, the hopes of nations are held. As you may know that the youth are the hope of the present and the pillar of the future, upon which countries depend to achieve development. Therefore, it was necessary for governments to place among their priorities the attention attached to youth and to provide everything that would advance their capabilities. I affirm my country’s commitment to empowering women and youth to acquire the capabilities and knowledge they need to actively participate in the process of construction, development, creativity and prosperity.
In conclusion, Mr. President,
We have urgent issues, facing the International Community that must be addressed through international cooperation, in order to reach the aspirations of humanity, in terms of stability, harmony and prosperity. Hence, we believe that consolidating the real concept of partnership and common destiny among all peoples and societies is the best way to realize those hopes and maximize the prestigious position that the United Nations yearns for achieving and sustaining.
Thank you, for your kind attention, and peace be upon you!
