Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ladies and gentlemen,
We find ourselves gathered here to address the problems that are causing the most distress to all of our peoples. It is our responsibility to ensure that every speech amounts to more than just words and that we can create a space for deep and sincere reflection.
COVID-19 continues to teach us all lessons. It has shown us how solidarity and empathy are vital in dealing with a pandemic and how countries made rapid progress in vaccine production with commendable speed, but it also brought to light some realities that we must face.
On vaccines: how difficult it has been for many countries, like ours, to have to tell our peoples that, despite having arranged and paid for vaccines on time through the COVAX mechanism recommended by the World Health Organization to ensure equitable distribution, the vaccines did not arrive on time. That is the experience of Paraguay and many other countries that have had to wait.
Paraguay has always been committed to multilateralism because we understand that the common problems that transcend our individual countries require a joint response, as in the case of COVID-19. However, we cannot hide our deep disappointment at the response of the multilateral system to the effective and timely distribution of vaccines.
That reality must be addressed in this Hall with a willingness to assess what has happened and to make changes for the future. We cannot turn a blind eye to the fact that some tried to use the vaccine as a tool for political and ideological extortion at one of the most difficult moments in recent human history.
I would like to highlight the cooperation of those brotherly and friendly countries that selflessly extended their hands in solidarity to the Paraguayan people by donating vaccines that allowed us to save lives and move forward with our immunization programme. I would therefore like to thank, once again, the Governments of the United States, Qatar, India, Spain, Mexico, Chile, Colombia, the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay for such a noble gesture. Our country will never forget it.
Mr. President,
Paraguay’s economy is largely based on food production for the world and our status as a landlocked developing country strongly conditions our development, including in a structural manner. In the context of post-pandemic recovery, those conditions will once again be a determining factor and it will be vital to facilitate effective access for our products to the markets of most developed countries.
For our part, to lessen the impact of those conditions, we are deploying our efforts to turn our geographical location into an advantage. The ambitious bioceanic corridor project, which will cross Paraguayan territory and link the Atlantic Ocean with the Pacific, is a clear example of how we intend to take advantage of our geographical position and promote the physical integration of our region.
Mr. President,
Integration and sustainable development are priorities in the Republic of Paraguay’s foreign policy. For decades, my country has been committed to an energy matrix based on clean and renewable energy, with a commitment to care for the environment and the conviction that energy is an indispensable requirement to continue promoting development.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Climate change is linked to the current water crisis affecting our region. Low river levels are compromising the availability of water for human consumption, affecting navigability conditions, severely damaging our foreign trade, which depends on river transport, and threatening the efficiency of our energy generation sources. We therefore underline the importance of honouring the international commitments of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, in particular those on climate finance, to support the mitigation and adaptation efforts of developing countries, especially those of us most vulnerable to global warming.
Mr. President,
Terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational organized crime are real threats to the international community. For that reason, Paraguay is committed to combating the financing of such activities and money laundering in particular. To that end, we have updated our regulatory frameworks — as well as taking other measures — with the aim of strengthening institutional response capacities and international cooperation to effectively address that scourge.
One of the greatest atrocities of organized crime is the use of children in its activities. Paraguay once again condemns that despicable practice, which we have already suffered, as well as other inhumane actions such as kidnapping and extortion.
Our Government will not cease in its unrelenting and determined fight against criminal groups within the framework of the law, nor will it spare any effort to achieve the return of our compatriots kidnapped by such groups. Our country is a staunch defender of life, the family and human rights.
Mr. President,
As a founding Member, Paraguay reaffirms its support for the United Nations and its importance as the forum that brings together most of the countries of the world.
In order to strengthen democratic governance and establish a more balanced system of decision-making in the United Nations, we believe that the role of the General Assembly should be strengthened and the reform of the functioning of the Security Council should be considered.
Universality is a basic principle of our Organization and, in that connection, we support the inclusion of Taiwan in the United Nations system.
Mr. President,
The ideal of a world governed by peace, democracy and respect for human rights, freedoms and security requires the efforts of all of us. As we set aside our differences and respect the principle of equality of all States, we must deepen the dialogue aimed at promoting actions to combat poverty and inequality in order to promote more equitable development.
I conclude by echoing Pope Francis’ words during the General Audience at the Vatican: “Hope is audacious”. Hope knows how to look beyond personal comfort, beyond the small securities and compensations that narrow our horizons, and how to open up to great ideals that make life more beautiful and dignified. Let us walk together in hope.
I thank you.