Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The COVID-19 health pandemic has truly challenged the world in ways most never envisaged. Across the world, people have lost their lives, livelihoods and are tasked with the enormous challenge of rebuilding their lives, communities, and countries during a very uncertain period in human history. However, uncertainty and inability are different: I strongly believe that we as a community of nations are capable and must recover together by remaining hopeful. Throughout history, mankind has been challenged but never has our collective spirit and determination to learn, share, progress and prosper through effective partnership been beaten. COVID-19 has proven to us all that when an existential catastrophe surfaces, we as a community of nations can rise to the challenge together. It is only fitting that the 76th Session of the UN General Assembly focuses on “Building resilience through hope.”
Building resilience through hope, hard work and multi-faceted partnerships is a must for an equitable and holistic recovery from COVID-19. The global health pandemic laid bare the frighteningly unequal world that we all live in today. The different pace of response within nations and regional organisations highlighted the vast gap there is in terms of opportunities between the developed and developing world, with countries like mine still struggling to offer the vaccination to most of our citizens. It is fundamental to recognise that responding to COVID-19 requires renewed commitment to vaccinations for all. Human safety is the cornerstone of any sustainable recovery from this disastrous health pandemic.
I am proud to say that the Somali Federal Government responded quickly to the health pandemic in the country. Our policies prioritised the lives of our citizens and most of our national resources and available human capital was dedicated to saving lives through direct medical provisions and information sharing. Despite its devastating impact on individual lives, livelihoods and the economy, COVID-19 galvanized the resilient Somali people, including the private sector and Diaspora, as well as international partners to do everything possible to mitigate the worst of the impact. This strong and timely partnership continues to this day and is saving lives and creating the opportunities our people urgently need to recover quickly and sustainably.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Recovering from the global impact of COVID-19 is indeed our most crucial single collective priority. There is not one single nation, community or individual which has not been detrimentally impacted. However, we must all understand that this recovery must be anchored on innovative and sustainable human centred policies and strategies delivered in partnership across continents.
In Somalia we are determined to ensure that our national recovery strategies are in line with our ninth National Development Plan. The core of this focuses on rebuilding a strong, cohesive, and fair Somali society underpinned by strong institutions and opportunities.
Somalia’s economy has been heavily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic like everywhere else in the world, but this has not deterred us from successfully continuing on our national economic reform path. The successes of these reforms have enhanced the trust between the Somali government and public and international partners and helped to deliver basic public services. It is because of these clear reform efforts that many of our valuable international partners, including the International Financial Institutions, provided much needed and appreciated grant financing to mitigate the worst impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Economic reforms are key to the sustainable recovery and development of Somalia. In this regard, we are determined to continue growing our domestic revenue base, strengthening transparency and good governance as well working even more closely with our people and all our development partners to ensure that Somalia’s recovery from COVID-19 is swift and sustainable.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The protection of the environment is an urgent global priority that the Somali government is committed to. Somalia has one of the longest coasts in the world, vast arable land for farming and huge blue economy potential. Indeed, Somalia’s many natural resources are the jewels in the present and future economic crown of the country and only through the protection of our environment can the resilient Somali people truly benefit from them. However, Somalia directly experiences the painful results of global warming.
Somalia has been cyclically challenged with recurring droughts and, in the same year, floods. This has painful human and economic consequences with many lives and livelihoods lost as a result. Somalia’s environmental challenges have led to food insecurity, an increase in the number of internally displaced people living in major cities like Mogadishu and the weakening of the traditional rural communal economic networks that have sustained the Somali people for centuries.
A Somali proverb states that: “The city lives of the provisions of the countryside” but, sadly today, it appears the countryside has been displaced in the major cities. This is not sustainable and certainly not conducive for the long-term development the Somali government and people envisage going forward.
Looking forward, it is the collective duty of all states, communities, and individuals to respond to the needs of the planet. We must all do our absolute best to cooperate to protect the future of our planet and our source of life, wealth, and well-being.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
In Somalia we strongly believe in the enduring ability of the international multilateral system to deliver a better world for all. In today’s interconnected, interdependent, and globalised world, cooperation, strategic collaboration, and good governance are a must. In this brave new world, it is almost impossible for any nation to strive for progress and prosperity alone. It is in this regard that all member states must work closely together to revitalise the United Nation so that it can effectively play its mandated role of connecting us all in navigating the serious global challenges that threaten our common development.
The UN remains the foremost multilateral institution for the regular high-level dialogue and decisions that guide the world’s collective response in today’s most pressing challenges including the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals.
As a member state, Somalia is proud of its contribution to the UN and the strong partnership that exist between the UN agencies and our government in Somalia.
The Federal Government of Somalia firmly believes that the UN can be revitalised through the reform of its own governance structures which must reflect the changing world we live in today. The UN must also have greater impact on people’s lives through a strategic focus on peace-building activities which are in line with the Sustainable Development Goals. Furthermore, to revitalise the UN and the impact of its activities across the world, we must seek to strengthen public-private partnerships to overcome the financing challenge the organisation faces at this desperate time of global crisis and need, especially, in the developing world.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Somali Federal government is working tirelessly to achieve the UN Sustainable Development Goals with, and for, our people. We are doing this by successfully confronting international terrorism, investing in basic public services, tackling corruption, and promoting good governance and inclusive politics. We are currently finalising the process of holding free, fair, and inclusive elections with the largest number of Somali electoral participants since the civil war in Somalia. The elections are centred on respecting the rights and wishes of the Somali people including the rights of women and youth to represent themselves within the very political arena that governs them.
In conclusion, it is important to reiterate the enormous impact COVID-19 has had on the world. We have all suffered and many still are hurting from the personal and economic pains caused by the health pandemic. Sadly, we also know that it is not yet over for many, especially the most vulnerable in the world, including many in Somalia. However, through effective multifaceted partnership, social solidarity, strong institutions, and hard work, I strongly believe that we can recover from COVID-19 more sustainably. Furthermore, to achieve sustainable development for all, we must also recognise and act on responding to the needs of our planet and creating a fairer society for all underpinned by opportunities and good governance. In Somalia, our government is working hard on all these priorities to improve the future for our people.
I thank you.