I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid on his election to preside over the General Assembly at its seventy- sixth session, and to assure him of my country’s full support during his presidency. I would also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge His Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkir for his sterling leadership of the Assembly during the very challenging previous session and to wish him well in his future endeavours.
The unpredictable turns of the global political and economic landscape have shown that multilateral cooperation, international solidarity and concrete action are needed more than ever. Indeed, we should all work together to deliver for the people and the planet prosperity, peace and partnerships. All of those interconnected challenges can be considered a puzzle, the pieces of which can be found in various countries. I urge all of us to work together to solve that puzzle and secure the future of our planet. With that, we will demonstrate leadership, humanity, political responsibility and commitment. Now is the time for solidarity, unity and global leadership.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has clearly highlighted the fact that in times of crisis, so- called international solidarity has little or no meaning. Multilateralism and international solidarity have come under pressure. The pandemic revealed weaknesses in the effectiveness of our international mechanisms and global legal infrastructure. Regrettably, the principle of collective effort and responsibility was replaced by a more individual approach — that of protecting the nation first. However, I want to take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to the countries and organizations that expressed solidarity and provided valuable support to my country and people in the battle against the pandemic at a very early stage. Our thanks go especially to the Kingdom of the Netherlands, India, China and the United States of America.
The weaknesses exposed in our health systems must be addressed with innovative measures, the use of modern technology and international cooperation. As we go forward, I want to underscore the importance of using science and technology for peaceful purposes. We must also pay attention to the long-term social
and psychological aspects, the widening education gap and digital divide, as well as unequal access to vaccines. Moreover, many countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, known as a middle-income region, regrettably have not benefited from the various COVID-19 multilateral debt-relief solutions.
We must develop a post-COVID-19 strategy, with a focus on developing an effective approach to improving vaccination levels in our societies, rebuilding the economy and establishing a COVID-19 recovery fund, with the support of international financial institutions and the private sector. We cannot go back to what we have been used to. We must rather focus on how we organize ourselves for a new normal, with COVID-19 as part of our lives, and on removing barriers to facilitate business and investment.
Beyond the severe impact of COVID-19, we have been challenged by financial and economic deficiencies, including a high debt burden. In that regard, access to concessional financing is critically important to rebooting our economy. We currently face unrealistic, unfair and counterproductive classification instruments. Suriname looks forward to new substantive methods of financial support, based on the socioeconomic reality of the countries concerned. At the same time, the vulnerabilities of countries should be taken into account. I call on all to support the multidimensional vulnerability index, as proposed by small island developing States, and to remove bureaucracy in supporting those States. It is in the interests of us all.
Suriname supports the call for a stronger and more effective United Nations. A restructured and revitalized United Nations must ensure that the Organization remains the source of redress for the international community and home to international justice and equitable decision-making. It is my firm belief that societies should be organized based on democratic values, good governance, an independent judiciary and respect for human rights. In achieving those objectives, we must allow countries, especially in the midst of the COVID-19 crisis, to develop sustainable economies without obstacles. Isolation and trade blockades, such as in the case of Cuba, in my own region, undermine those principles and are not conducive to the achievement of those goals. I therefore call for continued dialogue and negotiations to resolve differences and conflicts within the framework of the Charter of the United Nations. 

Climate change remains a serious challenge and an existential threat that requires the attention of us all. In recent months, we have witnessed its worldwide impact in the form of deadly floods, widespread forest fires and significantly increasing global temperatures. No country or region has been spared its wrath. In the case of my country, Suriname, and other countries with low-lying coastal areas, we are committed to fighting climate change because we are particularly vulnerable, even though we have contributed the least to the problem.
Suriname is a high-forest low-deforestation country, with forest coverage of approximately 93 per cent. Suriname significantly contributes to the mitigation of the effects of climate change. We are one of the few countries rated carbon-negative in the world. Yet we are not fully benefiting from global arrangements associated with sound forest management. The time has come to acknowledge the unique challenges faced by high-forest low-deforestation developing countries and to improve and maximize their fair access to climate finance.
As we prepare for the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 26), in early November this year, in Glasgow, we must bear in mind that noble ideals with strong political commitments do not mean much if not supported with new financial resources. COP 26 should therefore result in ambitious and actionable commitments.
Suriname calls on developed countries to recommit to the $100 billion pledge to support developing countries, as agreed in the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement. In this regard, I stress the importance of the Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization and the need to support its activities aimed at protecting the Amazon rainforest and its biodiversity.
One year ago, the new Government of Suriname, under my leadership, took office and had to deal with several financial and economic challenges. Amid the climate change challenges, and the COVID-19 pandemic, my country is also confronted with a challenging fiscal choice between servicing an increased sovereign debt or spending more on health, education and the livelihoods of our citizens. In order to get the tremendous foreign debt under control and make our economy healthy again, my country had decided, to develop a comprehensive recovery plan, which, at staff
level, has been approved by the International Monetary Fund, and we look forward to board-level approval as soon as possible.
Suriname is also at the cusp of attracting substantial foreign direct investments, particularly in the extractive industries, agriculture and tourism. For this purpose, an enabling environment is being prepared, including the development of a local content policy and a new investment code, to facilitate these investments. Accordingly, I am inviting the international business community to invest in my beautiful country and contribute to sustainable development and the earmarked transition towards a green economy.
In closing, I stand in this Hall, at the stronghold of multilateralism and international solidarity, and call on all of us to play our part in moving from words into action. We need a new more agile, equitable and effective multilateralism, based on the new realities the world is facing today — a multilateralism that is efficient, with collective leadership, a solution-based approach and serving the needs of all countries.
It is our obligation, as the leaders of today, to build a better world and planet for those living today, but more so for those generations still to come.
