Almost all the challenges we face are global. The solutions for them can be found only by working together. We have a historic opportunity to steer change in a direction beneficial for all humankind. I welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to hold a broad debate about our common future. We have to engage in meaningful discussion and dialogue, even with those — or specifically with those — with whom we do not agree. The culture of dialogue has dangerously deteriorated owing to widespread intolerant or offensive speech, even hate speech. We must do everything within our power to emphasize respect for and consideration of different opinions and their reconciliation. It is about the art of listening and speaking to others. Constructive cooperation is possible only through dialogue, and cooperation is the only way of reaching peaceful solutions to all disputes.
Having said that, I would like in my statement to address three main topics: the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, climate change, and peace and security.
First, with regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, this pandemic is proving to be a demanding and, also, unfortunately, divisive challenge for our societies. I express my deepest sympathies to all those who have suffered, and I pay respect to new heroes, among them medical and health-care workers, scientists, teachers and the young generation that has struggled with limited access to education. Science has once again proved its decisive role. The pandemic has set us before the greatest test in global solidarity in generations. I am
proud to say that my country, Slovenia, pledged half a million euros to the COVAX facility, and our share of donated vaccines, measured per capita, is among the world’s highest.
Secondly, with regard to climate change, the recent report of International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is alarming. It has become clear that the environment is in worse condition than expected. Let me assure the Assembly that, in its capacity as President of the European Union Council in the run up to and during the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 26), Slovenia is committed to the objective of a climate-neutral European Union by 2050. We will do our utmost to contribute to the success of the COP 26 conference in Glasgow. It is imperative that we move on climate-change mitigation, adaptation and financing in order to meet the objectives of the Paris Agreement.
The IPCC report is in fact a final, urgent call for immediate climate action from us. More than ever, we need to listen to scientists and experts. We can learn from them, and if we do, our decisions will be better. My permanent advisory committee on climate change, established two years ago, is an example of good practices. We regularly discuss a variety of aspects of climate change and recommend the Government or legislative measures to be adopted.
The much-needed green transition should go hand in hand with digital transformation. We must commit to achieving climate neutrality through reform and investments in the areas of energy efficiency, renewable energy, sustainable mobility and circular business models.
Climate change greatly affects water — through both the droughts and floods that we witnessed this summer — and has an impact on the quality of water. Competition for scarce water resources will intensify. The imminent water crisis is a threat, but it also presents an opportunity to rethink water innovation, governance and collaboration on all levels. Slovenia is a country with a long tradition of integrated water-resource management and cross-border cooperation on water. We will continue to raise awareness and understanding of the interlinkages between water and climate change and the importance of water for international peace and security.
Climate change profoundly affects food security. For the very first time in modern history, a famine in one country — Madagascar — is attributed solely to global warming. Since 2014, Slovenia has doubled its contribution for food security, in particular through World Food Programme initiations for South Sudan and Yemen, but also through bilateral projects. Slovenia has recently been helping to ensure food and water security for children and other vulnerable groups in Madagascar through the humanitarian association Akamasoa founded by Father Pedro Opeka, which is an outstanding example of fighting poverty. Through these efforts, over the last 30 years, the lives of thousands of poor people who once lived off of garbage dumps have changed.
The Akamasoa community in Madagascar gives humankind high hopes that poverty can be eradicated. However, our efforts to fight famine need to go beyond humanitarian aid. We have to accelerate the transition to sustainable and resilient food systems. That is why Slovenia welcomes the holding of the very first United Nations summit on food systems, which I see as an opportunity to raise awareness of the importance of responsible investment in environmentally friendly agriculture and the prevention of food loss and waste.
I believe the responsible use of new and emerging technologies can help us deal with modern challenges. New technologies offer numerous opportunities to mitigate climate change, support sustainable agriculture, introduce smarter mobility, offer better education and improve the effective use of resources, to name just a few activities. That is why I was delighted to officially launch, together with the Director-General of UNESCO, Ms. Audrey Azoulay, the International Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence, in Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, in March 2021.
The pandemic has only increased our dependence on the digital space, while at the same time revealing its vulnerability to the spread of the hate speech I mentioned earlier. It is important to keep in mind that fundamental freedoms apply both online and offline.
Thirdly, with regard to peace and security, the dependence on the digital space has also revealed our vulnerability to security threats and cyberattacks. It has highlighted the extent of the damage caused by such attacks with respect to critical infrastructure, the economy and society; these attacks have even caused loss of life. The nature of conflicts has expanded. To
enable peace and security in all domains, we should collectively and more efficiently respond to different crises that exceed the capacities of individual States to react alone. We should also promote reconciliation processes more energetically once peace and security are established.
The interconnected and interdependent nature of peace and security, sustainable development and human rights is more evident than ever. The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened the situation of the most vulnerable members of our societies — children, the elderly and human rights defenders. In many societies, we face shrinking spaces for freedom of expression. The full realization of human rights for all has proven to be key to our resilience and must be an integral part of our recovery.
The situation in Afghanistan has exposed the fragility of our human rights system. Let us never forget that women’s and children’s rights, as well as the rights of minorities, are universal human rights. Slovenia therefore welcomed the Secretary-General’s call for action on human rights and supports a higher regular- budget allocation for the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Finally, following the atrocities of the Second World War, we have built an international system for the promotion of dialogue and the peaceful settlement of all disputes. The system is codified in international law, for whose principles we must actively ensure respect, with a view to strengthening international justice. It is a question of effective multilateralism, which Slovenia passionately advocates. It is the finest achievement of the United Nations. Once again, let us work together.