On behalf of myself and my nation, I wholeheartedly greet the General Assembly. I hope that the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly will be beneficial to our countries and the entire human race.
I am very pleased to be here at the General Assembly again after two years to address members. In the past two years, humankind has experienced painful times. We lost 4.6 million people, including our friends, relatives and loved ones, to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is described as the worse health crisis of the last century. Despite all our efforts and the progress made in the area of vaccination, we continue to see the negative ramifications of the pandemic.
That is the context in which we hold the seventy- sixth session of the General Assembly. I believe that the messages of solidarity and cooperation that we will convey here will not only support the fight against the pandemic, but also increase the hope of billions of people who are experiencing very challenging times.
The General Assembly needs to be strengthened so that the international community can contribute more effectively to solving global issues. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Volkan Bozkir, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, for his fruitful work in that direction. I believe that Mr. Abdulla Shahid, who recently assumed the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, will carry the flag to greater heights. Turkey will continue to fulfil its responsibilities so that the
General Assembly can carry out its activities in the most efficient way.
On this occasion, I congratulate Mr. Guterres, who has been reappointed as Secretary-General for a second term, and wish him continued success.
It is extremely fitting that the theme of this year’s General Assembly is “Building resilience through hope — to recover from COVID-19, rebuild sustainably, respond to the needs of the planet, respect the rights of people and revitalize the United Nations”. First of all, I would like to express a fact, no matter how painful it may be to hear. Regrettably, during the pandemic, which again reminded us that humankind is one large family, we failed the test of solidarity. That was particularly true in the case of underdeveloped countries and poor segments of societies, which were left to their fate in the face of the pandemic. The distorted structure of the global system, which creates problems instead of solutions, deepens problems and leaves them unresolved, is also somewhat responsible for the increased loss of life around the world.
At a time when millions of people have lost their lives and tens of millions of people are suffering in the grip of the virus, it is a disgrace for humankind that vaccine nationalism continues in various ways. It is clear that a global disaster such as the COVID-19 pandemic can be overcome only through international cooperation and solidarity. It is impossible for any country to survive safely on its own before all countries are free from the pandemic. We hope that the will demonstrated in the General Assembly will constitute a turning point in understanding that fact.
In addition to the importance of global cooperation during the pandemic, we had the opportunity to observe the high level that medical science has attained. We took pride in the fact that the first vaccine approved by the World Health Organization was developed by two scientists of Turkish origin living in Germany. Turkey has tried to share the capabilities at its disposal with our friends and brothers and sisters around the world from day one, in line with our belief “let the people live so that the State can live”.
While providing the best health service to our citizens on one hand, on the other hand we also sent medical aid to 159 countries and 12 international organizations. On this occasion, I would like to inform members that, in the near future, we will offer our national vaccine, Turkovac, for the benefit all of humankind. We support initiatives towards strengthening the World Health Organization and preparing a convention against pandemics. We also emphasize in particular that a reasonable balance should be established between the protection of public health and the continuation of social and economic life.
The events we have witnessed remind us of some truths. Our joys, as our sorrows, our sufferings, as our achievements, and our problems, as our solutions, are all common. When one acts with a fait accompli logic, humankind as a whole pays the price, not just the developed countries.
Recently in Afghanistan, we witnessed in a painful way that problems cannot be solved by imposing methods that do not take into account the situation on the ground or a country’s social fabric. The people of Afghanistan were abandoned to the consequences of instability and conflict that have lasted for more than four decades. Regardless of the political process, Afghanistan needs the help and solidarity of the international community. We hope that peace, stability and security will be established in the country as soon as possible and that the Afghan people will find relief. We in Turkey will continue to fulfil our fraternal duty towards the Afghan people during this difficult time.
Ten years have elapsed in the humanitarian tragedy in Syria, which has led to the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people and the displacement of millions as the world looked on. While our country has welcomed close to 4 million Syrians, on the ground we are also battling terrorist organizations that have drowned the region in blood and tears. We are the only NATO ally that has fought Da’esh corps-a-corps and defeated the terrorist organization.
With our presence on the ground, we were able to stop the massacres and ethnic cleansing atrocities committed by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party terrorist organization’s extensions in Syria. As a result of our efforts, and at the expense of our martyrs, we were able to ensure the voluntary return of 462,000 Syrians to the areas in which we provided security. Similarly, thanks to our presence in Idlib, we have saved the lives of millions of people and prevented them from being displaced.
The international community cannot allow the Syrian crisis to last another 10 years. We need to display stronger will to find a political solution to the problem, based on Security Council resolution 2254
(2015) and in a way that will meet the expectations of the Syrian people.
We welcome the extension of the United Nations mechanism for humanitarian assistance delivered to north-western Syria via Turkey for another 12 months. We hope that the conciliatory approach displayed on the issue will also be emulated in order to move forward the political process and ensure the voluntary, safe and dignified return of asylum seekers.
I would like to reiterate here in the Assembly that making any distinction between terrorist organizations in the region and using such organizations as subcontractors on the ground is unacceptable. Acts of terrorism in various countries of the world over the past 10 years have shown that terrorism is not only our common enemy, but that of all mankind. We will remain committed to our fight against terrorist organizations that threaten the territorial integrity of Syria and our national security.
In our country, with the exception of Syrians, there are in excess of 1 million migrants under various statuses. Because of developments in Afghanistan, we are faced with the possibility of an influx of migrants from that country. As a country that saved human dignity in the Syrian crisis, we no longer have capacity to host additional migrants. On the basis of fair burden- and responsibility-sharing, it is high time for all stakeholders to do their part on the issue. A firm attitude now needs to be displayed against those who violate the 1951 Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and international humanitarian law.
Thanks to our strong support for international legitimacy in Libya, a ceasefire was declared, and then the Presidency Council and the Government of National Unity were formed. We will continue to support the efforts of the Government of National Unity to provide public services, unify all institutions and organize elections in a timely manner. I reiterate my call to the international community to stand by the legitimate Government, which represents all regions of Libya.
One of the most important problems that fuels instability and threatens peace and security in our region is the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As long as the persecution of the Palestinian people continues, lasting peace and stability in the Middle East is not possible. For that reason, occupation, annexation and illegal settlement policies must absolutely and immediately be brought to an end. We will continue to stand up against the violation of the international status of Jerusalem, which is based on resolution 181 (II), adopted in 1947, and against violations of the sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the rights of the Palestinian people. The peace process and the vision of a two-State solution must be revived without further delay. The establishment of an independent and contiguous Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of the 1967 borders, continues to be one of our primary objectives.
Important steps were taken recently with regard to promoting stability in the Caucasus. By exercising its right of self-defence, Azerbaijan has ended the occupation of its own territory, which is the subject of various Security Council resolutions that have not been implemented for many years. That development has also enabled the opening of new windows of opportunity in the region for lasting peace. We are determined to support every positive step taken by the parties involved.
We attach importance to the protection of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, including Crimea, whose annexation we do not recognize.
Within China’s territorial integrity perspective, we do believe that more efforts need to be displayed regarding the protection of the basic rights of the Muslim Uyghur Turks.
We maintain our stance in favour of solving the ongoing problem in Kashmir, which has lasted for 74 years, through dialogue between the parties and within the framework of relevant United Nations resolutions.
We also support ensuring the safe, voluntary, dignified and permanent return of Rohingya Muslims, who are living in difficult conditions in camps in Bangladesh and Myanmar, to their homelands.
A fair, lasting and sustainable solution to the Cyprus issue is possible only through a results- oriented, realistic approach. The leader of only one of the two peoples on the island, whom the United Nations considers as equal, can address the General Assembly. It is not fair that the other leader cannot make his voice heard on this platform. Any solution must reaffirm the sovereign equality and equal international status of the Turkish Cypriot people, who are the co-owners of the island. We therefore support the new vision put forward by the Turkish Cypriot people as a solution. I hereby call on the international community to consider the
views of the Turkish Cypriots with an open mind and without prejudice.
The continuation of a calm environment in eastern Mediterranean is in our common interest. We hope that the problems regarding maritime boundary delimitation will be resolved within the framework of international law and good-neighbourly relations. To that end, we must first abandon the mentality in which Turkey, the country with the longest coast in eastern Mediterranean, is completely disregarded in the region. Our proposal to organize an eastern Mediterranean conference for dialogue and cooperation, in which all actors in the region take part, is still on the table.
Similarly, we believe that the problems in the Aegean Sea should be resolved through bilateral dialogue.
We also maintain our determination on the European Union membership process.
We are also in full solidarity with the African continent and the African Union today, drawing on the strength of our deep-rooted ties with Africa, which date back centuries. With that understanding, we continue our efforts to hold the third Turkey-Africa Partnership Summit in Turkey in the upcoming period.
With our Asia Anew initiative, we are consolidating Turkey’s unifying position between Europe and Asia. Likewise, we attach great importance to developing our relations with Latin America and the Caribbean region through bilateral and multilateral platforms. Turkey will continue to remain engaged with every step taken towards a safer, peaceful, prosperous and equitable world for everyone.
While the Earth embraces millions of living species on its soil, it expects us only to respect the balance of nature in return for that generosity. Unfortunately, in its pursuit of progress and development throughout history, humankind has recklessly exploited the resources the Earth offers. At the end of this process, which has gone on for centuries, we are now facing threats entirely caused by humans, outside nature’s own balance. The problems, which we may classify under headings such as climate change, air pollution, water and food security and loss of biodiversity, have reached such an extreme that it is steering the future of humankind into uncertainty.
Among those topics, we should focus in particular on climate change. Aside from being an environmental problem, it will lead to irreparable consequences and uncertainty. Greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide, which have increased by 50 per cent as compared to the pre-industrial period, literally raise the world’s temperature. Indeed, for some time now, disasters have been occurring all over the world due to an increase of 1.1°C as compared to the pre-industrial period. We are experiencing unusual events such as floods in Asia and Europe, hurricanes in America, drought in Africa, fires in the Mediterranean basin, rainfall on the peak of Greenland and snowfall in deserts.
Those disasters not only cause damage to the environment and the ecosystem, but also threaten people’s lives and properties. In many places, people are collectively preparing to go to other places — to migrate. However, the world has still not found a solution to the refugee problem caused by conflict-prone crisis regions, such as Syria and Afghanistan. At this time, we do not know how to deal with the migration of hundreds of millions of people due to factors such as drought, food shortages and meteorological events.
The greatest impact of climate change will be observed on the populations living in the centres of large cities. For example, the city of New York, where we are now, recently experienced very challenging days due to giant hurricanes within only a two-week timespan, which, in turn, caused rainfalls witnessed only once every 500 years. The destruction caused by rains affecting Western Europe has yet to be repaired. Although Turkey produces the most rapid and effective solutions in that regard, we too have experienced our share of challenging days.
A significant part of the world’s infrastructure is a product of the past two centuries of human progress. It is not possible to handle the ramifications of climate change with the existing infrastructure. The continued rise in global temperatures and the concomitant expectations for more intense rainfalls, must steer us all towards new pursuits. For example, it has become mandatory for urban planning to take into account the impacts of climate change.
Another danger awaiting our world is that forests, being among the most important carbon sinks, are now facing extinction due to land use, on the one hand, and fires on the other.
Another area affected by the increase in temperature is our seas. Expanding water and melting glaciers have raised sea levels by 20 centimetres over the past
century. This figure is the fastest increase during the past three thousand years. If effective measures are not taken and greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase, sea levels are expected to rise by more than one metre by the end of the century. Such a rise means that an important part of coastal cities and island States will be completely wiped out. Of course, that situation would also be accompanied by new and massive waves of migration.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to the fact that all these problems are due to an increase of only a 1.1 °C increase in temperature. Consider what would happen if that increase were to hit 1.5°C, 2°C or more.
After all these developments, as the States of the world, we came together in 2015 to fight climate change and agreed on the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the aim of which is to limit global temperature rise to 1.5°C by the middle of the century. Current trends show, however, that this goal is not possible if precautions are not taken.
For that reason, first and foremost, countries historically responsible for the emergence of problems that led to climate change, to own up to that responsibility. It may be possible to prevent the coronavirus pandemic with the vaccines we have developed, but it is out of question to find such a laboratory-manufactured solution to climate change.
For that reason and to address climate change, we take every opportunity to repeat our motto — “the world is bigger than five”. The countries that have done the most damage to nature, our atmosphere, our water, our soil and the Earth, and those that have wildly exploited natural resources, should also make the greatest contribution to the fight against climate change. Unlike the past, this time no country has the luxury to declare “I am powerful so I refuse to pay the bill”. Climate change will treat humankind equally. It will treat everyone exactly the same — European, Asian, American, African, rich and poor. The duty for us all is to take measures against that enormous threat with fair burden-sharing and to duly and immediately meet our obligations.
For its part, Turkey acts with that mentality. We are among the first countries to have signed the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. However, we had not yet ratified it due to the injustices related to stated obligations and burden-sharing. Here from the General Assembly, I would like to announce to the whole world the decision we took following the recent progress made within this framework. We plan to present the Paris Agreement on Climate Change for approval to our Parliament next month within the framework of Intended Nationally Determined Contribution and in conformity with the positive steps that will be taken. Before the United Nations Climate Change Conference, to be held in Glasgow, we envisage completing the ratification phase of the Agreement, which seeks carbon neutrality targets. We consider this process, which will lead to radical changes in our investment, production and employment policies, as one of the main elements of our 2053 vision.
Of course, we have also taken other measures to combat climate change. We prepared the action plan needed for harmonization with the European Green Deal and put it into effect in the past month. With the zero-waste project led by the First Lady, my wife, Her Excellency Mrs. Emine Erdogan, we increased our recycling rate by nine points in three years. We increased our carbon sink areas by increasing our forest assets from 20.8 million hectares to approximately 23 million hectares. We increased the share of renewable energy resources in our electricity generation capacity to 53 per cent. We have been promoting the steps that will restructure our industry in accordance with cleaner production activities for a better future. We are determined to bring these efforts forward by receiving the necessary financial support. Turkey is not indifferent to any global problem, crisis or call and will also do its part on climate change and environmental protection.
Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to reiterate our belief that a fairer world is possible, despite the difficulties we face. In that vein, we continue to view the United Nations as the unique platform for solving issues that concern the entire human race. Located straight across from this building, our new Turkish House building, which we inaugurated yesterday, is a testament to our trust and confidence in the United Nations system. As one of the top five countries with the largest diplomatic networks, Turkey has a strong presence in the field and at the table for reach conscientious and fair solutions for large geographic areas.
Together, we can build a world of peace, stability, prosperity and happiness. I once again greet one and all on behalf of my nation and wish the General Assembly
success in its seventy-sixth session. I wish everyone good health.