Almost two years ago now, the world changed completely, affecting every nation all over the world — rich, poor, big, small, developed and non-developed. There was no plan, which compounded the situation, and every country dealt with the pandemic with different approaches. And we are familiar with the results, which have differed from country to country, although some implemented similar measures.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has finally and starkly revealed our strengths and our weaknesses. We should acknowledge the outstanding work of researchers and scientists, of our health-care systems, which were overwhelmed, and our teachers and professors, who came up with ways to continue to provide education. The way work was done was extraordinarily transformed. In short, humankind demonstrated its ability to adapt in the face of such a large-scale crisis. Let me say that we saw the best version of humankind. In return, however, the pandemic exposed the inequities and structural disparities between countries, as well as the democratic soundness and aptitude for freedom of various Governments and societies.
Our country, Uruguay, has an enormous aptitude for democracy and very much values individual freedom as the purest state of the individual, which demonstrated during the pandemic, as if it were not obvious, that freedom means different things when we have unequal access to the necessary tools. What it has made clear is the false dichotomy between the presence of the State and individual freedom. Furthermore, in the countries where the State has done a good job of protecting people, the most vulnerable individuals can access the tools they need to exercise their freedom. I believe that we should take a moment to reflect on that point. While we are discussing the domestic policies of each of our countries, those policies nonetheless have international repercussions.
We cannot conceive of freedom without responsibility and solidarity for each of us in our own environments. In my country, Uruguay, we demonstrated that by exercising responsible freedom, we could manage much of the pandemic without major reversals. We had community solidarity when we undertook major activities, but we also saw it reflected in actions unknown to the wider public that nonetheless had a positive impact. At the international level, in which countries participated in one way or another, we entrusted part of our development to them. We should be clear in that regard, particularly where vaccines are concerned. There was a race against time to develop vaccines, and they were developed in record time. Here I should say that I do not want to talk about patents or formulas but about access to the vaccines. There was a shortage of vaccines, and their distribution was not equitable. Every country was forced to purchase its own vaccines. I believe it is important to underscore that, because we all know that the vaccination process is vital to restoring freedom in our countries.
I would like to mention three other points that have had an impact on people’s freedom. During the pandemic, Governments needed to protect their people. Our first priority was to protect our fellow countrymen. However, we also made sure that such protection did not become protectionism. We needed the freedom to trade and compete for excellence. We needed access to markets. Our country is now in that process, the process of reopening up to the world. We need cooperation with all the countries, blocs and major Powers.
In addition, I could not let today’s meeting go by without addressing the issue of human rights violations perpetrated by Governments that are members of the Organization. Obviously we respect the principle of non-intervention, but we must also understand that we cannot ignore such violations. We must denounce them. The abuse of power undermines those freedoms. Authoritarian Governments that are feared by their peoples and restrict their freedoms end up impoverishing their people for several generations.
Lastly, and on a point that has already been mentioned here by several Heads of State, when it comes to freedom in the future and the health of the planet, we have delivered statements, participated in conferences and made commitments. Now is the time for action. Others have also stressed that point at this rostrum. Financing mechanisms are also crucial so that countries can have access to and make progress on the issues of sustainable development and environmental protection.
I would like to conclude with an optimistic view of the current situation. As a young man, I opposed the philosophy of Thomas Hobbes and the concept that man is a wolf to man. Time has shown that he was deeply wrong. For those who have not read his book, I would also recommend a book by the Swedish author Hans Rosling, Factfulness, in which he clearly demonstrates humankind’s positive evolution. That is why, after the Assembly, each of us will return to our countries and
our daily duties in the domestic arena. But let us not lose sight of what we have said and heard here. Every action in every corner of the world involves us all. If there is a lesson to be drawn from the pandemic, it is that we are all one.
