I wish to extend my congratulations to Mr. Abdulla Shahid on the assumption of his duties as the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session. I am convinced that, under his able leadership and with his vast experience, he will lead the session to success.
I highly appreciate the significant contributions of Mr. Volkan Bozkir in his capacity as the President of the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session. I also wish to once again congratulate Mr. Antonio Guterres on his reappointment as the Secretary-General of the United Nations. I believe that, with his perseverance and dedication, he will work to guide the Organization’s direction towards realizing its priorities in the years to come.
The General Assembly of the United Nations convenes this year against a unique backdrop, as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is jeopardizing people’s lives worldwide. At this very moment, I do not doubt that all our thoughts these days are with our countries and our peoples; my own heart yearns for my homeland, Viet Nam, where the entire Vietnamese nation is vigorously combating this pandemic to protect the health and lives of the people, sustain economic growth and ensure social security, leaving no one behind.
No statistical figures can truly measure the grief and loss caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. It is a question, above all, of the loss of lives, and subsequently of severe economic damage and far-reaching impacts on societies and people’s well-being. The pandemic has sounded a warning bell of the shocking destruction that results from such non-traditional security challenges as disease or climate change if they are not addressed in a timely and decisive manner. The pandemic has also exposed the shortcomings of the global governance system and the increasing inequalities among nations.
Nonetheless, COVID-19 is not the sole challenge that we are facing today. Increasing tensions among major Powers have led to a divisive and unstable international system. Wars are taking the lives of many innocent people. Disputes over territories and resources in many areas are on the verge of erupting. In many regions, the rise of power politics, disregard for international law and unilateral acts of coercion are hindering countries from exercising their legal rights. In spite of that gloomy picture, what really motivates us is the strong desire for peace, cooperation and development among people around the globe — and our recognition of the importance of international solidarity and multilateralism.
With its 75-year experience in preserving peace and nurturing friendly, just and equitable international relations, the United Nations continues to assert its key role in the multilateral system and is effectively coordinating global efforts to respond to global challenges. Against such a backdrop, I fully support
the theme proposed by the President of the General Assembly. Let me now share with the Assembly some of my thoughts.
First, our most urgent task today is to expeditiously contain COVID-19 worldwide. The world cannot be safe if any single person or country still suffers from this pandemic. Viet Nam values the role of United Nations agencies and other multilateral institutions, particularly the COVAX facility, in promoting fair access to COVID-19 vaccines and medications. For the pandemic to be turned back, it is essential that we stand in solidarity, uphold a high sense of responsibility and step up cooperation, particularly in terms of allocating vaccines to nations with a low vaccination rate.
Secondly, the key solution to containing the pandemic and fostering economic recovery lies in our ability to strengthen our own resilience in the face of crises, but this does not mean that we have to do it alone. Resilience can only be sustained if it is based upon cooperation and connectivity among nations, particularly at a time when non-traditional security challenges, which do not know borders, can deeply affect any nation. We highly value the role played by the United Nations system and hope that it will continue to work closely with its States Members in endeavours to build resilience, without failing to accommodate the interests and concerns of all countries.
Thirdly, the challenges we face can be turned into development opportunities. As our daily lives, productive endeavours and business activities have to undergo changes to adapt to the pandemic, we are presented with an opportunity for digital transformation and the utilization of novel technologies, which can enhance the productivity, competitiveness and self- reliance of our economies. It is also a chance for us to pursue green transformation, sustainable development, trade and investment facilitation. We should also work together to promote the flow of goods and people and maintaining global supply chains. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides us with an excellent blueprint for seizing such opportunities; it is indeed a call for enhanced cooperation. We appeal to all countries to live up to their financing-for-development commitments and reschedule debt payments by developing countries, thereby turning opportunities into concrete development outcomes.
Fourthly, cooperation in mitigating and preventing the dire impacts of climate change has become more crucial than ever before. Harsh weather conditions, sea-level rise, environmental pollution and biodiversity degradation are the cumulative consequences of decades of humankind’s reckless quest for development. These challenges are pushing us to act promptly to safeguard our planet and realize the internationally agreed threshold of 1°5C.
As we are heading towards the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, we need to make every effort to cut greenhouse-gas emissions, and developed countries should take the lead on this. Moreover, developing countries should receive further assistance in financing, technology transfer and capacity-building, so as to reduce emissions and enhance disaster prevention and mitigation in ways that foster the transition towards a green and circular economy. This is a shared opportunity for us to ensure harmony between humans and green nature.
Fifthly, the key to fostering recovery and growth in the post-pandemic era is sustaining peace, security and stability in every country, every region and the world at large. Viet Nam calls for a global ceasefire and an end to all violence to ensure the safety of civilians and facilitate humanitarian assistance in areas of conflict.
Viet Nam endured decades of war in order to reclaim its independence and national reunification and to escape isolation and embargoes. We have made every effort to mobilize our internal strength, maintain our self-reliance and adapt to the prevailing trends of our time to reach the level we are at in our potential, international standing and prestige today. We understand that nothing is more precious than independence, freedom, peace and development for all nations. Viet Nam condemns all acts of war, power politics and violations of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. More than ever before, all stakeholders in international relations need to act in good faith and shoulder their responsibilities while avoiding tensions and confrontation. We should strive together to reshape international ties and build trust among countries on the basis of equality and cooperation. We must also respect the principles of independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of States, and resolve disputes in a peaceful manner.
At this year’s general debate, we reaffirm our solidarity with the people of Cuba and urge a complete
end to the unilateral embargo on Cuba. We hope that the situation in Afghanistan will soon stabilize for the Afghan people, especially their women and children, so that they can live in peace. We support the just struggle of the Palestinian people and a two-State solution for the establishment of an independent Palestinian State alongside the State of Israel.
After 35 years of renewal, Viet Nam has made historic accomplishments. We are on the verge of becoming a high-income developed country by 2045, on the centenary of Viet Nam’s independence. Our aspiration to be a strong and prosperous Viet Nam can be realized only when the country is truly a law-governed State of the people, for the people and by the people. Viet Nam pursues a people-centred approach and strives to achieve social progress and equality, preserve cultural values and protect the environment while promoting sustainable and inclusive development. That is closely aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals, which we are striving to fulfil.
We have pursued a foreign policy based on independence, self-reliance, peace, friendship, cooperation and development and the diversification and multilateralization of external relations. As a responsible member, Viet Nam is proactive and engages actively in extensive international integration, while making responsible contributions to the concerted efforts of the international community. We continue to support multilateralism, with the United Nations at its centre and international law as its foundation. We uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter and strive to contribute to a more democratic and effective United Nations. We will always remember and treasure the invaluable assistance of the United Nations to Viet Nam. The fruits of Viet Nam’s reform and integration can be attributed in part to the resources and policy advice of the United Nations development system.
In the region, Viet Nam works closely with fellow members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to promote ASEAN centrality in the maintenance of peace, security and prosperity in South- East Asia and the Asia-Pacific region at large. ASEAN and the United Nations have consistently consolidated and developed their relations generally, becoming a role model for cooperation among the United Nations and other regional organizations. We are making vigorous efforts to implement the five-point consensus endorsed by ASEAN leaders on fostering dialogue, reconciliation and humanitarian assistance to the people of Myanmar. Viet Nam shares ASEAN’s position and the international community’s common voice on the importance of peace, stability, security, safety, freedom of navigation and overflight in the South China Sea. We hold that all parties should refrain from unilateral actions that could further complicate the situation and resolve their disputes and differences through peaceful means, in line with the Charter and international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (UNCLOS). We must also fully observe the Declaration on the Conduct of the Parties in the South China Sea and achieve a substantial and effective code of conduct of the parties in the South China Sea, in line with international law, including UNCLOS.
The President took the Chair.
On this momentous occasion, on behalf of the State and the people of Viet Nam, I want to sincerely thank all countries for the trust they have placed in Viet Nam in its capacity as a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the 2020-2021 term. Over the past two years Viet Nam has always upheld the principle of partnership for sustainable peace. We have promoted dialogue and cooperation and actively joined concerted efforts to prevent and address conflicts. Viet Nam has advocated respect for the Charter and international law, while promoting areas such as cooperation with
regional organizations, conflict prevention, mine action and the protection of people and critical infrastructure in armed conflicts.
The national flag of Viet Nam is flying high in United Nations peacekeeping missions in South Sudan and the Central African Republic, and it will soon fly in other missions. Given our desire to make further contributions to the work of the United Nations, Viet Nam is campaigning for a seat at the Human Rights Council for the 2023-2025 term, as well as at other important United Nations agencies. We look forward to all countries’ continued support in that endeavour.
The path ahead will not be easy. However, I am convinced that the hearts of the people of the world will beat as one. Viet Nam will work closely with countries and people around the world so that together we can prevail over the pandemic and build a world of peace, prosperity and happiness. That will be a glorious victory for us all.