I wish to begin by congratulating His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid on his election as President of the United General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session. I am confident that his wealth of knowledge and vast experience on multilateral issues will lead to a successful discharge of the important responsibilities of the General Assembly throughout this session. Zambia stands ready to work with the President as he executes his mandate in presiding over the matters of this session. To the outgoing President, His Excellency Mr. Volkan
Bozkir, I wish to convey Zambia’s appreciation for his commendable service to the United Nations family during the seventy-fifth session.
I have the distinct honour to deliver my maiden speech as the seventh President of the Republic of Zambia following the electoral victory of our United Party for National Development in the presidential and general elections held on 12 August. I am pleased to inform the General Assembly that the people of the Republic of Zambia once again rose to the occasion to usher in a new Government through a peaceful election. That has enabled Zambia to further consolidate its democratic credentials. It serves as an inspiration to the African continent, as the outcome of our election was determined by those who vote and not those who count the votes. We are therefore proud to provide leadership in our country, where people aspire to a free and just society and where they aspire to have their voices heard.
We were able to achieve that political transformation even at the time when Zambia was grappling with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and in the midst of deep sorrow following the passing on of our founding father and first republican President, Dr. Kenneth David Kaunda. I therefore wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Zambian people, to pay tribute to this iconic leader, who was fondly known in our country and elsewhere as “KK”. It is without doubt that the last remaining steward of liberation struggles has left an indelible mark on humankind. Dr. Kaunda’s principles, values and contributions to the ideals of emancipation and independence did not only spread across the African continent, but across the entire globe. His untold devotion to peace and unity laid the very foundation for Zambia’s stature as a beacon of peace, not only in Southern Africa but on the African continent as a whole. The Zambian Government will therefore build upon KK’s profound legacy to live in peace and harmony with one another. As we work towards this year’s theme, let us remember the important lessons that Dr. Kaunda taught us, especially as we work towards revitalizing the United Nations system.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a far-reaching socioeconomic impact globally, including disturbing trade flows, supply chains and various economic activities on our continent. In addition to the loss of lives, the pandemic increased poverty levels through job losses, stressed health-care systems and, worse still, the delivery of education to learners. The disruption to educational systems, particularly in developing countries, was in part due to inadequate information, communication and technology facilities within our countries. In response to the pandemic, Zambia has developed a national preparedness and response plan for COVID-19, which has been used to guide the implementation of pandemic mitigation measures. The vaccine programme forms an integral part of the response plan in our country. Despite our placing the vaccine programme high on the list of mitigation measures, Zambia has managed to vaccinate a mere 3 per cent of its population. That is against the country’s target of vaccinating 70 per cent of the eligible population by the third quarter of 2022. That clearly highlights the inequitable access to vaccines in developing countries, especially given that more than 2 billion vaccines have been administered worldwide.
It is fair to say that recovery from the pandemic hinges upon mass vaccinations before considering other reforms or facilities that tend to fail when countries lock down their economies. It is therefore gratifying that this session of the General Assembly will consider building on initiatives such as the African Vaccine Acquisition Trust and the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility. The two initiatives have made it possible for low-income countries, such as Zambia, to access life-saving vaccines, which will contribute to building resilience and recovery from the pandemic. I wish therefore to express Zambia’s appreciation for the support that has been provided so far through COVAX and the African Vaccine Acquisition Trust facilities, which the United Nations system and various stakeholders have benefited from.
To further guarantee resilience, we call for concerted and enhanced global efforts towards promoting investments, particularly in local manufacturing capacity and technology transfer on vaccines, related infrastructure, human capital, as well as research and development.
The new Administration in Zambia is cognizant that a conducive governance environment is a precursor for the country’s political stability, security, economic growth and sustainable development. It also fosters enhanced transparency, accountability and consultative dialogue. With that realization, our Administration will work towards strengthening oversight and governance institutions and ensure the independence and autonomy of the three arms of Government, particularly the legislature and the judiciary. The fight against corruption will be at the centre of our transformation agenda, and that shall be executed with zero tolerance for corruption. We shall also promote free media
and an active civil society, as they are critical in upholding checks and balances, human rights, liberties and freedoms.
My Government’s high priority is to restore macroeconomic stability, attain fiscal and debt sustainability, promote economic growth, enhance economic diversification and manage the contraction of debt. I am confident that those measures will restore macroeconomic stability and put the country back on track to economic recovery.
To sustain that growth, Zambia will dedicate efforts to guarantee a stable and predictable environment that will attract and protect local, regional and foreign direct investment, as well as enhance local participation in our economy. That is a prerequisite for a vibrant private sector-led economy, thereby creating jobs and opportunities for all our people.
To complement those efforts, Zambia has embarked upon an ambitious economic and social transformation agenda with a view to creating equitable opportunities and poverty reduction for the Zambian people, especially the youth and women, who delivered the election victory in our country. In order to achieve that goal, our Administration shall design and implement interventions aimed at inducing enhanced productivity in agriculture, mining, energy, financial services, tourism, technology, health and education, as well as support the growth of micro, small and medium enterprises.
Despite those well-thought-out interventions, today’s world economy is more complex than ever before. Given the numerous global concerns, including pandemics, climate change and illegal human migration, it is imperative that we adapt to those effects of globalization by fostering key partnerships and deepening integration at all levels. That is critical to ensuring that we realize our aspirations of restoring Zambia on a path to sustainable economic growth and development.
Zambia is aware of the critical role of the United Nations in guiding the world to focus on the sustainable development agenda. In particular, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development set the tone and benchmarks for countries to incorporate sustainability in their development policies. Our New Dawn Government in Zambia is committed to realizing tangible growth and sustainable development while paying particular attention to ensure that those are not achieved at the expense of future generations.
Like many other developing countries, Zambia calls for closer cooperation and support in terms of capacity to adopt better, safer, climate-change sensitive and modern methods of increased production and productivity. Our Administration has established a ministry that is the first of its kind in Zambia — the Ministry of Green Economy and Environment. To address that as well as other important issues concerning environmental sustainability, it became important for us to establish that new Ministry, which will be crucial to build our ability to implement climate-positive actions in our country.
I am drawn to the prophetic inscription on the opposite the United Nations Headquarters, which reads:
“They shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more” (The Holy Bible, Isaiah, 2:4).
Those words serve as a reminder to the United Nations to work towards global peace and international cooperation. Although we have made leaps and bounds in the areas of peace and security and stability, there remain pockets of conflict in many regions of the world where the guns have not yet been silenced.
The silencing of the guns therefore goes beyond addressing conventional warfare, as it also depends on addressing the new emerging threats of our century, which include the challenges of extremism and international terrorism, cybercrime, asymmetric warfare, the proliferation of non-conventional weapons and organized crime. As an international community, we need to continue working together to address the root causes of those global threats through various national, regional and global mechanisms.
The former Secretary-General of the United Nations, the late Mr. Kofi Annan, laid out an ambitious agenda before the General Assembly at its sixtieth session, which is still pertinent today. In his report entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005), he made the case that development, security and respect for human rights cannot be enjoyed in the absence of the others. Those are the indispensable realities of a well-functioning nation and international system. However, I wish to go a step further in asserting that the foundations of sustainable economic growth and development are peace and stability. Without peace and harmony, development cannot be attained. Zambia will therefore continue to support national, regional and
international initiatives aimed at promoting peace and security and stability.
In that vein, Zambia reaffirms its commitment to playing an active role in the Southern African Development Community mission in Mozambique, which is aimed at restoring peace to Cabo Delgado province. In addition, Zambia remains committed to the cause of the Lusaka master road map on practical steps to silence the guns in Africa — an initiative being implemented by all African Union member States to promote peace and security, which has since been endorsed for extension for a further 10-year period, from 2021 to 2030. We therefore wish to call for the continued support of the United Nations in silencing the guns in Africa and other continental initiatives.
In the quest for promoting global peace and security, Zambia notes with satisfaction the entry into force of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which became operative on 22 January 2021. The entry into force of the Treaty is a tangible feat towards advancing the cause of nuclear disarmament on the international stage. Zambia encourages those States that are yet to ratify the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons to come on board so that we can continue making advances towards achieving our aspirations to eradicate nuclear weapons on our continent.
On the reform of the Security Council, Zambia is still concerned by the slow pace of negotiations, which have continued without making much progress. In that regard, Zambia wishes to reiterate the Common African Position — the Ezulwini Consensus — which calls for a more representative and democratic Security Council where Africa, like all other world regions, will be fairly represented.
The call for gender equality is now a century-old struggle for women to participate equally with men in society as a whole. Despite the realization that women’s full and effective participation in all areas of life results in prosperity, women are still less involved in public life and decision-making than men. It is important that we continue to demand the promotion of gender equality while paying particular attention to the rights of women and children, especially girls, and the rights of people living with disabilities.
For us in Zambia, we will remain committed to the advancement and promotion of women’s rights. For the first time in the history of our country, our new Parliament has elected the first female Speaker of the National Assembly to preside over Zambia’s supreme law-making organ of Government. Furthermore, I believe it is important and I state with pride that Zambia’s Vice-President of the Republic, as well as the deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, are both women. We are very proud of that.
Consistent with our commitment, Zambia is implementing various initiatives designed to harmonize the development, programming and implementation of economic empowerment efforts targeting women and young people across the country. In doing so, our aim is to eliminate hunger and rural poverty, as we know those issues affect women and children disproportionately.
In addition, Zambia emphasizes the importance of ensuring that communities include women at every level of decision-making, as doing so will translate into a discourse that will be inclusive, representative and therefore more holistic and insightful. Our Government will focus on increasing support for women through the creation of employment opportunities and entrepreneurship programmes, among other things. We will also focus on increasing access to secondary education for adolescent girls from impoverished households through financial aid and grant schemes.
I wish to stress that the Government of the Republic of Zambia will remain committed to economic diplomacy and multilateralism and to consolidating global efforts through the promotion of open and cordial relations with the international community in order to ensure collective sustainable growth and development in our country.
As I conclude, I wish to emphasize that it is the duty — and indeed the responsibility — of all of us in the global democratic community to make democracy work for all our people. We can do that by delivering democracy dividends by accelerating economic development and a balanced distribution of resources among our people and ensuring access to opportunities for a better life for our people. That is what will make democracy attractive to our people in our individual countries. That is what will make democracy sustainable and keep at bay autocratic and heavy- handed alternatives from leadership in our countries. That is what will foster a peaceful, prosperous and more united world.