26.      On behalf of the Afghan delegation, I should like to associate myself with the members of the General Assembly in congratulating most sincerely, His Excellency Amintore Fanfani, Foreign Minister of Italy, on his election as President of the twentieth session of the General Assembly. The election of Foreign Minister Fanfani — who is not only a well-known statesman but also a man of knowledge and a scholar of great eminence — to his high office is a tribute to his great country and an expression of the high esteem with which he is personally regarded by all members of the Assembly.

27.    Among the tributes paid to him, perhaps the most impressive expressions were those in which the representatives of so many nations spoke of their ancient and present relations with the country he represents. Afghanistan, as a country which enjoys most friendly relations with Italy, naturally associates itself with those nations. We were, therefore, grieved to learn of the accident suffered by our distinguished President and we would like to take this opportunity to convey to him our best wishes and hopes for a speedy recovery.

28.    I should also like to pay tribute to His Excellency Alex Quaison-Sackey, the President of the nineteenth session, who fulfilled the heavy responsibilities and duties of that office in a most admirable way during one of the difficult sessions in the history of the Organization. I am sure that his contributions to the work of the United Nations will always be remembered.

29.    The representative of Japan has already spoken [1332nd meeting] on behalf of the Asian countries to welcome the admission of the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore to membership in the United Nations. However, I should like to take this opportunity to extend once again our most heartfelt congratulations to the Governments and the peoples of these new Member States. We are confident that they will make a constructive contribution to the work of the United Nations.

30.    Since we met last time and I had the privilege of addressing the General Assembly [1323rd meeting], at home my country has been pursuing its objectives of economic, social and cultural development, guided by its firm belief in the lofty principles of democracy as the traditional way of life of its people and as an essential and basic precondition for the preservation of freedom, equality and the dignity of the human person.

31.    No change has taken place in the international policy of Afghanistan. We continue to be a non-aligned country whose basic traditional policy is one of friendship and co-operation with all peoples and nations.

32.    As the oldest non-aligned State Member of the United Nations, we are most gratified that the sincerity of our impartiality, objectivity and independent judgement in regard to all international situations has continued under all circumstance and thus has strengthened and expanded our relations with our friends on all continents. We are not a party to any form of association, alliance or bloc which would in any way influence us to judge any situation except on its merit. It is in this spirit that I venture to express our views on some of the problems before the General Assembly.

33.    The policies of non-alignment have played a significant role in the maintenance of peace and in other fields of international endeavour. That has made us more confident that the co-operation of the non-aligned countries and the appreciation by others of their impartial and unselfish aspirations for the betterment of relations among all peoples and nations will result in the realization of the peaceful objectives which are common to us all.

34.    Thinking for a second of an old saying which goes, "No matter how much peace you have at home, you cannot enjoy it in a disturbed neighbourhood". I should say that no other country is more unhappy about the recent events in the subcontinent of India than is Afghanistan. It is only natural for us to be disturbed over the grave situation which still prevails in that region of the world, to which we belong.

35.    Under the present circumstances, we do not think that any other problem should be of greater concern to anyone than putting a permanent end to armed confrontation and to bloodshed. The efforts already made in that direction are a great source of satisfaction to us. The wisdom demonstrated by the Governments of India and Pakistan in accepting the cease-fire was in no way surprising to any reasonable and peace-loving mind.

36.    We have welcomed these developments with the strong hope that they might lead to a peaceful and permanent solution of a problem which has been one of the most important international preoccupations, not only of the Asian countries but of the world community as a whole. War is the most undesirable way of seeking a solution of any dispute. In the India-Pakistan conflict, it is not only most undesirable but also most unlikely to lead to a solution of the problem.

37.    The Government of Afghanistan desires a peaceful solution, not only of this problem, which has already led to war between two neighbouring countries, but also of all problems in the region which are unhappy remnants of the colonial era. Afghanistan will approve of no policy which is not aimed, before all else, at the maintenance of peace and security in a region to which it belongs, a policy in the interest of the peoples, for whom peace is the only condition in which they can fulfil their aspirations for their economic, social and cultural development.

38.    The end of colonial rule in that part of the world created not only the problem of Kashmir, but also certain other problems which have affected the relations between the countries of that area in an undesirable manner; for in the absence of such problems those countries could co-operate .with each other in a most friendly atmosphere for the well-being of their peoples.

39.    In view of the existence of such problems, neither Afghanistan nor anyone else could agree with the following statement made in the general debate by one speaker on the morning of 28 September 1965 or any statement similar to it made at any time anywhere:

"The creation of Pakistan, where Muslims would be free to develop in accordance with their culture and way of life, was the result of the democratic process of self-determination in which each of the provinces which today form part of Pakistan freely and formally expressed its desire to do so. Kashmir alone of those States, provinces and territories of pre-partitioned India, has been deprived of the right to participate in this process of self-determination." [1339th meeting, para. 131.]

40.    As I have said, we cannot agree with that statement, by way of example, I cite the disputed territory of Pakhtunistan, referred to in pre-partitioned India as the Northwest Frontier Province, and the tribal territories, where the fate of a much larger population than that of Kashmir is involved, and where a population which has been continuously demanding its right to self-determination, was also deprived of that same right. Fortunately, this problem is not yet before the United Nations, and we hope that it will be solved by peaceful means and in a spirit of understanding and friendship on the basis of justice and in accordance with the will of the people and their political leaders.

41.    Unless we are deliberately pressed in the matter, we shall consider this clarification sufficient to prevent the repetition of such statements, because from the bottom of our hearts we seek nothing but friendship and understanding, and to have a sense of justice prevail.

42.    The serious situation in South-East Asia in general, and in Viet-Nam in particular, cannot escape anyone's attention anywhere today. The developments, however, are no doubt of great importance to the Asian countries as the continuance and expansion of the war in Viet-Nam becomes increasingly alarming. Although the question of Viet-Nam does not fall within the scope of the work of the General Assembly at this stage, the mere absence of any other arrangements for peaceful negotiations makes it a concern of all Members of this Organization, Afghanistan has participated, with some other non-aligned countries, in earnest appeals for the restoration of peace in this area. We are convinced that a political solution through negotiations among all parties should not be delayed for any of the reasons given or for any of the excuses sought. We agree with the Secretary-General that military action can neither bring peace nor restore stability.

43.    The real causes of conflicts in this area are well known. Therefore, the basic consideration should be concentration on the elimination of these causes. The background of the problem and the experiences of the past should provide the parties directly concerned with a reasonable ground for replacing the hot war by peaceful negotiations. We believe that everything else should depend upon peaceful negotiations, and such negotiations should never be dependent upon any conditions that might hinder them or reduce their effectiveness or, worse still, prevent their taking place.

44.    The other matter that we have followed with much concern in the question of Cyprus. Its great importance to us stems from its existence as one of the crucial problems confronting the Middle East and, more particularly, from our most friendly aspirations for Cyprus and Turkey. I should like to emphasize the importance of an urgent, peaceful, democratic and just solution of this problem in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and in conformity with the wishes of all inhabitants of Cyprus. In this connexion, we should like to stress that the Republic of Cyprus is an equal Member of the United Nations and that its independence, its full sovereignty and territorial integrity should be respected in any arrangements designed for the solution of its problems.

45.    It is a source of satisfaction that the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus has helped to maintain peace on the island. None the less, it is regrettable that the mediation efforts have not yet succeeded in promoting an agreed settlement. It is our hope that the General Assembly will express itself on the urgency and importance of the renewal of United Nations mediation efforts, with a view to reaching a solution of the problem of Cyprus which would result in the betterment of relations between the parties directly concerned and would safeguard the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

46.    One of the most important items on the agenda of the General Assembly, from both a political and a humanitarian point of view, is the question of the Palestinian refugees. We are gratified that the Special Political Committee has already given priority to the consideration of this problem, While, from the political point of view, a just solution of this question is essential for the elimination of tensions in the Middle East and the maintenance of peace and security in that region, the humanitarian aspect of the situation cannot be underestimated. The United Nations should always keep in mind its political and humanitarian responsibilities to the people of Palestine.

47.    We welcome the deep concern expressed by the General Assembly and the prompt and timely action which it took by its resolution [2012 (XX)] on the situation in Rhodesia. Afghanistan has always supported the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples as proclaimed in the Charter and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

48.    Appreciating the attitude of the United Kingdom Government that a unilateral declaration of independence for Southern Rhodesia would be an act of rebellion and that any measure to give it effect would be an act of treason, we joined the sponsors of the resolution by giving it our support.

49.    Before and, in particular, since the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Afghanistan has strongly supported and will continue to support all measures that would put an end to the unbearable calamities and intolerable sufferings born of the domination of people. We cannot emphasize at present or in the future more strongly than we have in the past our firm belief in the urgent need for an unconditional liquidation of colonialism. The United Nations has played a great role in this field, and we are particularly appreciative of the work of the Special Committee of Twenty-four charged with measures for the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). It is our hope that these efforts will continue constructively and that the organs entrusted with this task will be given clearer mandates to recommend to the General Assembly peaceful and practical measures which should be taken with a view to putting a complete end to colonialism in all its forms and manifestations without further delay.

50.    In this connexion I should like particularly to underline one point once again. By colonialism, we do not mean only one specific form of domination, and by no means only the classic form of Western colonialism. To us, any form of domination of any country, territory, or people by an alien Power is colonialism, wherever it may exist. We have never been convinced that new names should be sought for the new forms of alien domination.

51.    In recent times, while the classic form of colonialism is gradually vanishing, it is more important to pay careful attention to the other and perhaps more dangerous forms of domination, including the domination of many territories and peoples in many parts of the world by alien Powers which, themselves, not very long ago, were colonies.

52.    In the efforts made recently to find the facts of such situations, we welcomed such initiatives as the on-the-spot examination of these situations by the Committee of Twenty-four. It is our hope that these efforts will be continued in the future and that they will not be confined only to certain aspects of domination of people by people or or to any specific region or continent.

53.    In all cases, we have believed and expressed our belief that peace and stability depend solely on the respect for and observance of self-determination, which is no longer a political principle, but a fundamental human right. The sincerity of those who uphold this right can be fully tested only by observing whether they adhere to it in all cases and in all places. It is our firm belief that any double standard in the field of international relations is untenable.

54.    Under the constant fear of the annihilation of mankind, we maintain our earnest desire that all specific and general actions be taken to bring about complete, general and universal disarmament.

55.    Adherence to the principle of coexistence and the condemnation of all policies advocating the use or threat of force constitute the basis of our thoughts on this subject. Without these, neither the confidence nor the atmosphere required can be created.

56.    The lack of success in the negotiations on disarmament is most deplorable. The many years of effort on the part of the United Nations have convinced us that new approaches should be made to this most important aspect of all matters of war and peace.

57.    The idea of a world disarmament conference, initiated at the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, was supported by Afghanistan on the basis of the urgent need for such a new approach. It is our hope that this session of the General Assembly will take definite steps in connexion with the convening of such a conference at the earliest appropriate time.

58.    These steps, however, require the unanimous support of this Organization, because a divided assembly of nations cannot logically call for a universal world gathering. In such a case, we should have good reason to hope that the world conference will take place in the interest of humanity as a whole, and that it will be a success.

59.    This, however, in no way means that the work of this Organization in the field of disarmament should be hindered in any manner. The problem of disarmament should remain, as it has been, one of the most important concerns of this assembly of nations and should be furthered by efforts, universal in scope.

60.    One of the most important questions which should receive the special attention of the General Assembly is the question of nuclear tests. It is our hope that the treaty on the partial banning of nuclear tests will be followed, without any delay, by a ban on such tests in all environments by all nuclear Powers, and that priority will be given to questions connected with nuclear and thermonuclear armaments and the prevention of their proliferation.

61.    The Assembly should give a clearer and stronger expression at this session to its concern by calling on all nuclear Powers not to ignore their great responsibilities toward humanity any longer. There is nothing more alarming than the spread of nuclear weapons, which should be prevented, in the interest of the preservation of the human race, at the cost of any political sacrifice.

62.    We are confronted in this respect with a special situation, but not a difficult one to understand, that has hindered the participation of all nuclear Powers in taking common measures in the nuclear field. To make this participation possible, everything should be done to bring about the balance essential for mutual confidence and create the atmosphere required for the fulfilment of the universal aspirations of mankind, putting an end to the fear of annihilation. One of the most important measures in this respect is the complete destruction of the existing nuclear weapons.

63.    Disarmament depends solely on mutual confidence between all nations, particularly the major Powers. A call for disarmament must, therefore, naturally be preceded by a call for efforts to be made toward easing the prevailing tensions. This can only be done, as I have said before, through acceptance of the principle of coexistence and the right of all peoples and nations to economic, social and political self-determination.

64.    Peaceful settlement of political disputes is essential for the creation of an atmosphere in which hope for the solution of the problem of disarmament and other problems can be cherished. In this regard, Afghanistan welcomes the item proposed by the delegation of the United Kingdom [A/5964], We welcome, also, the consideration of the item proposed by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (A/5977], which has provided the General Assembly with an opportunity to give full consideration to the essential principle of non-intervention.

65.    How to approach these important matters should be our first consideration. A careless approach will result not only in failure, but might add to the difficulties which have hindered common agreements and delayed the termination of the prevailing international tensions.

66.    At all previous sessions of the General Assembly, the Afghan delegation has emphasized the importance of the universality of the United Nations. At this session, it is particularly important to do so. While we are gratified by the increase in the membership of the Organization, we regret that we have not been able to see the purpose of universality of the Organization realized in its fullest sense.

67.    We still do not find the legitimate Government of China occupying its rightful seat. The withdrawal of Indonesia from the United Nations has added to our regrets. Whatever undesirable circumstances may dictate, it is hoped that this Organization may in the long run achieve the goal of universality. In this connexion, our hopes are nurtured by the fact that, in spite of its withdrawal from the United Nations, Indonesia will continue to co-operate with the United Nations by upholding the principles of international co-operation.

68.    Contrary to the ideas of the pessimists, the Organization has been able to prove its usefulness in the maintenance of international peace and security by bringing about a more desirable situation in certain areas of grave conflict. For example, the collective action taken by the Security Council in the India-Pakistan dispute, the courageous intervention of the Secretary-General, and the wisdom demonstrated by the Member States involved in accepting the suggestion of the United Nations, have gratified us, not only because they have led to the prevention of bloodshed, but also because they have strengthened our faith in the effectiveness of the United Nations Organization.

69.    Afghanistan has always maintained the policy of opposing the use of force and violence in any international dispute. Whatever the future may bring, this Organization has succeeded in playing a positive and constructive role on many occasions when no other source of peaceful solution to existing international problems was conceivable.

70.    In one of the statements made here the hope was expressed that in this critical year we would see a revival of the authority of the United Nations, a renaissance in international endeavour. We share this hope with Lord Caradon, the representative of the United Kingdom.

71.    I wish to give the strongest expression I can to our firm faith and confidence in the United Nations Organization. We feel most gratified that at this session of the General Assembly we are relieved of the anxieties with which we were confronted during the nineteenth session. The great wisdom demonstrated by the entire membership in realizing the importance of the United Nations, in the interest of mankind, is a great source of encouragement for all of us who believe that there is no substitute for this world Organization and that this Organization can fulfil the aspirations and hopes of mankind only if it remains effective.

72.    I wish to express our gratitude for the spirit of understanding shown by the major Powers, without which the unanimous agreement essential for a solution to our difficulties could not have been reached.

73.    In my statement at the nineteenth session [1323rd meeting], I expressed a strong hope — not an easy thing to do in the circumstances then prevailing — that the collective wisdom of the international community would give us no reason to be discouraged and that, on the contrary, it would give cause to hope for the increasing strength and effectiveness of the Organization once it had emerged successfully from its difficulties.

74.    The atmosphere in which the twentieth session has started is a hopeful one. The maintenance of this atmosphere should be our first and foremost goal.

75.    There is no doubt that the normalization of the work of the Assembly, which we are happy to see achieved, is of the greatest importance, But the elimination of the financial difficulties of the Organization has yet to be accomplished. The unanimous consensus of the entire membership of the United Nations, advocating voluntary contributions by Members and particularly substantial contributions by the highly developed countries, should provide us with strong grounds on which to urge that such contributions be made as soon as possible and without delay. We welcome the most recent appeal made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in this regard.

76.    The future of peace-keeping operations of the United Nations is, undoubtedly, of equal importance to all Members of the United Nations, large and small. It is our hope that the Assembly, in its consideration of the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, will devote special attention to this problem.

77.    As a member of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, Afghanistan stated that before any final recommendations are made, the views of all Members of the United Nations should guide the Committee in the fulfilment of its task, as this is a matter of direct interest to every individual Member of the Organization. It is our hope that the Assembly will co-operate in giving this assistance to the organ that it may decide should undertake the task of the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations in the future, with a view to making final and concrete recommendations to the General Assembly.

78.    As we have stated, the key to a resolution of this matter is agreement. Agreement can be reached only by finding a common denominator, recognized and respected by the entire membership, and then using it only in the interest of the Organization as a whole, thus avoiding stubborn adherence to rigid individual positions. Such a common denominator exists. It is the Charter of the United Nations.

79.    The difficulties, however, arise from the fact that the Charter is open to interpretation, a fact which is neither new or accidental. Certain provisions of the Charter were deliberately left vague and thereby open to interpretation. In fact, it was purposely decided to omit provisions which would place the final power of interpretation with any definite body. At all times, however, the implicit understanding remained that strict adherence to the Charter meant adherence to such interpretations as would be in the interest of the Organization. Therefore, as we have repeatedly stated, after so many changes in the world and in the Organization only a flexible way of thinking in the interests of the Organization can lead us to an agreement which would serve the basic purpose of strengthening the United Nations.

80.    The only point that I would like to emphasize again at this stage is that all of us agree on the desirability of the United Nations having the capacity to undertake peace-keeping operations.

81.    We also agree that the Security Council has, in accordance with the Charter, the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. At the same time, no one has denied the responsibilities and certain functions and powers of the General Assembly under the Charter.

82.    In the consideration of the primary responsibilities of the Security Council, the foremost obligations of its permanent members can neither be forgotten nor ignored. Moreover, it should be kept in mind that when the Security Council, and particularly its permanent members, were granted the authority of enforcement and a position of privilege, it was considered to be inconceivable that either the Council or any of its members would, in. practice, act contrary to the expressed wishes of the entire membership of the Organization.

83.    As we have stated before, the Security Council and the General Assembly should be considered complementary organs in the work of the United Nations. For the harmony referred to in the Charter, between the various organs of the Organization, to exist in fact, it is essential that special attention be paid to bringing about closer relationships between these two vital parts, the General Assembly and the Security Council,

84.    It is our clear position that, in conformity with the principle of collective responsibility of all Member States, the rights of the Assembly should be respected on matters of assessments and approval of financial burdens resulting from any peace-keeping operations, and that the voice of all the Members of the United Nations should be heard in the choice of methods to be used for such operations.

85.    We, however, are not yet quite convinced that the new requirements considered to be needed in the light of all the changes that have taken place since 1945 can be met. This in no way means that we are denying such changes. But we would like the General Assembly carefully to consider whether basing itself on such changes would really bring about more definite provisions with which the entire membership could agree under the present circumstances.

86.    In all circumstances, the economic and social conditions in the developing areas of the world remain realities of paramount importance to us. The work of the United Nations in this field is just as important as, and in no way less significant than, its work in the political arena. Often the activities of the United Nations in the economic and social fields are overshadowed by its political activities. This is unfortunate because the success or failure of the United Nations must not be judged, primarily, on its political achievements. Worthy of equal consideration is its success or failure in the promotion of effective international co-operation in the economic, social, cultural and humanitarian fields.

87.    Despite numerous efforts and repeated attempts to change the regrettable conditions in the developing countries through international co-operation, the fact remains that in many respects the situation has worsened.

88.    The first United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was a milestone in the efforts made by the United Nations towards defining the tremendous economic and trade problems confronting the developing countries. At the end of the Geneva meeting all of us noted the results of the Conference with satisfaction, but the implementation of its resolutions fell too short of the high expectations cherished by the developing countries.

89.    One of the concrete results of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was the convening of the conference of plenipotentiaries for the adoption of a Convention on Transit Trade of Land- Locked Countries. As the Assembly is aware, this Conference adopted a Convention. Although this Convention is not entirely satisfactory in view of the legitimate aspirations of the land-locked countries, we consider it as a preliminary step towards achieving these goals, inasmuch as it might contribute to the normalization of international trade for the countries which have no access to the sea.

90.    The unrestricted right of land-locked countries is undeniable. Therefore, the transit problems of these countries should be kept under constant review by this Organization, particularly the organs of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, with a view to meeting the needs of the land-locked countries.

91.    Afghanistan appreciates the great value of bilateral arrangements and agreements in the field of economic development and international co-operation. We are most grateful to the friendly countries that have assisted us with our economic development through unselfish policies of international co-operation which have made such assistance acceptable to us in the face of our strictly independent policies.

92.    In addition, the necessity for efforts to be made towards multilateral co-operation cannot be ignored. The United Nations has done an admirable job in this respect, but unfortunately the implementation of its resolutions has not received the attention it deserves.

93.    As a developing country and as a member of the specialized agencies, we feel moved to make a statement of gratitude for the work of each of these agencies in their respective fields in helping us.

94.    In the field of human rights, the United Nations has been assigned a significant task and an important responsibility. Although considerable efforts have already been undertaken by the United Nations in promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms, we believe that these have not been adequate. We are convinced that the expansion and intensification of work in this 'area is necessary, and it is in this connexion that I welcome the consideration of the proposal of the Government of Costa Rica for the establishment of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights [A/5963], Afghanistan will consider this proposal most favourably.

95.    In this connexion, it is for the United Nations as a whole to respond with a positive and united voice to the statement made by Ambassador Goldberg when he said: "In our concern for the rights and freedoms of nations, we must not neglect the rights and freedoms of individuals," [1334th meeting, para. 101.]

96.    I cannot leave this rostrum without expressing a note of gratification on behalf of my delegation in connexion with the recent visit of His Holiness Pope Paul VI to this Organization. We were very much impressed by the sincerity of his message. We assure him, among other upholders and advocates of peace, of our love for and dedication to peace on the basis of our own spiritual convictions. His statement that the people of the earth should turn towards the United Nations as the only place of hope and that this Organization is the source of the education of mankind in the ways of peace will always be remembered by us. It was a special privilege to have joined him in his prayers for the welfare of mankind.