1.    The Austrian delegation has already had the opportunity to express its congratulations upon the election of His Excellency Amintore Fanfani to the high office of President of the twentieth session of the General Assembly. We feel sorry about the most unfortunate accident which prevents him from presiding over our present deliberations and I should like to ask you, Mr. Vice-President, to convey our best wishes to Mr. Fanfani for a speedy recovery.

2.    As the representative of a small nation, I am particularly gratified that the General Assembly is again working under normal conditions. In our view, it would have been disastrous if this ominous crisis had not been solved. I would like to express my appreciation for the spirit of co-operation shown by all Member States, which made it possible to overcome these difficulties. The United States, by its flexible and accommodating attitude, has certainly contributed to this development.

3.    There is considerable criticism and doubt with regard to the usefulness of the long and tedious discussions in the General Assembly and in' its Committees. Personally, I am convinced that this confrontation of opinion and exchange of views, year after year, is indispensable in a constantly changing world. It creates better understanding among nations and thus contributes to a peaceful evolution on our planet.

4.    The political situation in today's world does not inspire much optimism, at any rate not in Asia. We in Austria, too, deeply regret this fact, because we have for some time been aware that conflicts occurring even tens of thousands of miles away have their repercussions in our own area.

5.    In due recognition of this world-wide interdependence, Austrian foreign policy supports every effort contributing towards stability. We are convinced that everyone must above all concentrate on his own proper sphere and, having thus set an example, may derive a mandate to talk about peace in other regions and offer counsel and advice. Today I am in the fortunate position of giving a favourable account of developments in the region of Europe, of which Austria is a part.

6.    There is evidence of a trend towards political stability throughout Europe, and the neutral non-committed countries of that continent have acted in this respect as catalysers.

7.    There is no doubt that the neutral European States and pact-free Yugoslavia have been of decisive importance for the evolution of the relative stability that currently prevails in Europe. The fact is all the more significant, as it is well known that Eastern and South-Eastern Europe were centres of extreme political restlessness in the course of history. Nevertheless, these tendencies towards a state of relaxation will only lead to complete stability when the problem of Europe's most populated country — which also represents its greatest economic potential, the problem of Germany — has found a peaceful solution.

8.    Austria has a task in this part of Europe, just as every State has one within the geographical sphere to which it belongs and in which its people live and work. This particular responsibility arises from Austria's centuries-old ties with the peoples and countries of the Danube basin. We must, however, be careful in our approach, since many mistakes and miscalculations have been made in previous periods of history.

9.    In Austria-Hungary once lived more than 50 million people. Its frontiers stretched some 6,000 miles. In contemporary Austria there live merely 7 million people, but the new Republic has inherited a quarter of the length of the former boundaries. It is only natural that history and geography should — perhaps sooner than any other country — enable us to have a clear concept of how, in the prevailing circumstances, to develop relations with out neighbours in Eastern and South-Eastern Europe.

10.    Our aim is a maximum of stability in this part of Europe which did not exist for centuries. No one should indulge in the deceptive hope that this will not require onerous daily efforts.

11.    To speak of stability means to us that we wish to settle our problems between ourselves in such a way that we do not depend on the advice of the major Powers and that we do not have to be afraid of their interventions. By this we are not pleading for a policy of disengagement from the major Powers, but we believe that they have already far too many international obligations. It is therefore only a sensible policy on the part of the smaller countries to relieve them from the burden of additional engagements. The smaller States, by abdicating their responsibilities and leaving them more and more to the major Powers, would merely pave the way for an increasing feeling of isolationism.

12.    Should it be possible to avoid a dramatic sharpening in world relations, the current process towards a detente in this part of Europe will continue.

13.    It is all the more important to mention these tendencies as they occur between countries adhering to Communist ideology on the one hand and Austria on the other, which is, without reservation, committed to the principles of democracy, which brought about such impressive results in the economic and social life of the people of Western and Northern Europe as well as of the United States.

14.    We in Europe have had a most harrowing experience, indeed. Should it not be possible to draw a lesson from it?

15.    Some days ago, the Twentieth International Red Cross Conference came to a conclusion in Vienna, where more than 100 countries were represented by governmental and Red Cross delegations. Throughout the Conference a pleasant and co-operative atmosphere prevailed. In various resolutions the usefulness of collaboration between the United Nations and the Red Cross was emphasized. Practical co-operation in the humanitarian field proved to be a reality.

16.    Important decisions were also reached concerning civil defence, measures against indiscriminate warfare, and other tasks in the interest of peace. I wish to underline that all the resolutions were adopted practically unanimously.

17.    In the humanitarian field, therefore, an atmosphere of detente and unity clearly prevails that augurs well for the treatment of similar questions in the United Nations.

18.    Austria was proud to act as host for such a great conference which attained so much unity of spirit and action.

19.    Having outlined the situation which prevails in our region, I should like to stress the extent to which this region forms part of the greater community of nations. In this connexion I wish to emphasize the depth of our commitment to an auspicious development throughout the world; we declare, and solemnly affirm, our loyalty to the United Nations, whose foremost task — the preservation of peace — we fully support and further with all our strength. In that context we should remember and give due weight to the postulate only recently pronounced from this rostrum with commanding eloquence by His Holiness Pope Paul VI; the postulate of the universality of the United Nations.

20.    It is certainly one of the great weaknesses of this Organization that two of the largest countries in Asia and Europe are not among its Members — countries whose truly magnificent cultural and technological achievements are recorded in history.

21.    In past years, and this year again, we have heard from various quarters within the United Nations that it may be desirable to have the People's Republic of China among the Members of this Organization. There is much to commend this viewpoint. And yet it seems to me that we ought to clarify, at this stage, whether the People's Republic of China is really interested in United Nations membership; whether it prefers to remain outside or would, in order to agree to become a Member, impose terms to which the United Nations could not possibly agree. We who belong to this Organization consider our membership an outstanding distinction and feel privileged to be allowed to participate in its work. Such clarification is necessary, I submit, before we enter into a debate on the substance of the matter.

22.    At the outset of my statement I drew attention to the fact that the general political situation gives rise to serious misgivings. We, too, understand that disputes concerning the interpretation of treaties on matters affecting vital interests may arise. However, we are hopefully convinced that all these grave differences which aggravate world tensions can be solved in the spirit of existing international agreements and with a proper regard for the aims and principles of the United Nations.

23.    I speak here as the representative of a country which does not belong to any military alignment, a country that puts a high premium on its status of permanent neutrality, to which it rigorously adheres. I may therefore be permitted to offer an opinion on this question which is a source of great concern to many of us; indeed, I can hardly give sufficient weight to my warning not to resort to means which contradict the principles and aims of the United Nations as well as the letter and spirit of the treaties concluded by the parties concerned. Much an we appreciate the feelings of a number of countries with which we have the closest ties, we fail to understand that any Member should consider leaving this Organization. What sense can it possibly make to turn one's back to the United Nations today? Do we not all know that in the end there will be no other way but to return?

24.    Permit me now to report to the General Assembly, as I have done on all previous occasions, on the action taken on resolutions 1497 (XV) of 31 October 1960 and 1661 (XVI) of 28 November 1961, concerning the status of the Austrian minority in South Tyrol. The first resolution requested Italy and Austria to enter into negotiations with a view to finding a solution for all differences relating to the implementation of the Paris Agreement of 5 September 1946. The second resolution, having noted with satisfaction that such negotiations had taken place, went on to affirm the first resolution.

25.    We have conducted the negotiations as requested. At the beginning of this year high hopes had arisen and we felt that we had reason to assume that our partner in these negotiations had become aware that, in the final analysis, a proper understanding of the just aspirations of a minority is a valuable contribution towards harmonious conditions within his own State. However, questions of vital importance for the continued existence of the minority remain to be solved, and we are seriously concerned that the continued delay in these matters may prevent the conclusion of an agreement — a delay which would certainly be contrary to the spirit of the above-mentioned resolutions.

26.    I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to reaffirm the determination of the Austrian Government to resolve the dispute between Italy and Austria concerning the implementation of the Paris Agreement through negotiations in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. We have reached constructive solutions to almost all the open questions that have arisen in our relations with our neighbours and other countries near to us; why should it not be possible in this case too?

27.    It is, however, my duty to remind the General Assembly that such a solution can only be reached if the population of South Tyrol is granted genuine self-administration in all matters of its own concern.

28.    In rendering this report, I have been animated by proper respect for the General Assembly and the resolutions adopted by it. I should like to add an expression of appreciation of the fact that in 1960 and 1961 the General Assembly of the United Nations, after due consideration, expressed its unanimous desire to bring this question to a satisfactory solution.

29.    On the occasion of the twentieth session of the General Assembly it would be only appropriate to recall, in a detailed manner, the outstanding achievements which this Organization has accomplished since its inception.

30.    There can be no doubt that the United Nations peace-keeping operations account for the most important and significant features, and I should like to stress that my country has participated in these operations to the extent of its abilities and resources. Austria has not only supported the peace-keeping activities of the United Nations financially, but it has also actively participated in two operations with medical and police units. I am therefore glad to be able to announce that the Austrian Parliament recently passed a law which permits the Austrian Government also to make available military contingents upon the request of an international organization or of the International Red Cross.

31.    Peace-keeping operations of the United Nations since the Second World War have contributed essentially to the security of our troubled world. In this context, I would like to draw the attention of the Assembly to the fact that the expenses of all United Nations peace-keeping operations over the last twenty years amount roughly to some $620 million, which approximately equals the cost of one single day of fighting during the Second World War. Despite their overwhelming importance, these operations do not usually bring about a final political solution. We therefore think that further studies should be made
of the peaceful settlement of all kinds of disputes. In this spirit, we welcome the proposal by the United Kingdom Government to include an item in this respect in the agenda [see A/5964].

32.    It is with great satisfaction that we took note of the unanimous cease-fire decision of the Security Council in the conflict between India and Pakistan, two nations with whom my country maintains particularly friendly relations. This is one of the most difficult conflicts which the United Nations has ever had to face and it is indeed gratifying, after the crisis the world Organization had to undergo within the last year, to see the Security Council take a unanimous decision in a matter of such outstanding importance. We also wish to compliment the Secretary-General U Thant, for his untiring efforts to carry out the Council's decision and to put it into practice.

33.    One of the most important problems in this Organization is the participation of the newly-emerged countries. Needless to say, Austria, a country which has never pursued a policy of colonization, strongly supports the right of each nation to self-determination, freedom and independence. In the cases where these rights have not yet been recognized in practice, every effort has to be undertaken to give these peoples the opportunity to decide their own future. We are deeply convinced that any suppression of national aspirations cannot but aggravate the existing situation. It seems to us only fair to give the young nations an adequate chance actively to participate in the work of this Organization. We are therefore all the more gratified that the Charter amendments, enlarging the Security Council as well as the Economic and Social Council, came into force t thus guaranteeing an appropriate representation of the young nations in the organs, of the United Nations. Austria, realizing the urgency of this problem, was one of the first countries to ratify the Charter amendments.

34.    The Austrian Government has consistently held the view that the question of general and complete disarmament deserves our continued and most careful attention. It is in the interest of all mankind to reach a speedy resolution to halt and reverse the armaments race, both between the great Powers and among the smaller nations.

35.    We must, however, try to understand and weigh the political situation in the world in a realistic manner, and we must therefore approach the complex matter of disarmament in a pragmatic way, which means that we must be prepared to proceed step by step. Above all, we must avoid hampering progress by adopting the view that nothing can be achieved unless we find an over-all solution and reach agreement on everything that is desirable.

36.    My Government holds the view that in our negotiations priority should be given to the most urgent and crucial problem of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. In this- connexion, we favour any solution which could bring about speedy progress in this field.

37.    While we fully understand the request of those delegations which think it necessary to link an agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons to the adoption of collateral measures and in particular, to an agreement on the suspension of all underground tests, we nevertheless hold the opinion that the adoption of a non-proliferation agreement should not be hampered by too many conditions.

38.    We are convinced that even a preliminary agreement would constitute major progress which might, like the Moscow Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests, provide a basis for a wider international agreement in this field. Here we share wholeheartedly the opinion of all those delegations which expressed the view that the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna could play an active role through the application of the system of safeguards which was accepted by its recent Tokyo Conference.

39.    In connexion with the proposed world disarmament conference, I should like to point out that Austria favours this idea, since it would give all nations an opportunity to take a stand in the disarmament negotiations. Such a world conference, however, would have to be very carefully planned and would only have a chance of success if all the nuclear Powers would indeed participate in the discussions. I should, however, like to express the hope that the implementation of such a project would not lead to a breakdown of the present mechanism of the disarmament machinery of the United Nations. This machinery should therefore be kept in operation until we are able to replace it by a more effective instrument.

40.    In connexion with the manifold problems of disarmament, I should like to express the appreciation of the Austrian Government that the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed not to place nuclear weapons into orbit, and that it is the declared policy of all space Powers that outer space should be used for peaceful purposes only. We must, however, make sure that we do not lag behind the speedy scientific and technical progress in this field and endeavour to reach in time the necessary legal and political agreements.

41.    In conclusion, I should like to stress once more the importance of the tasks lying before us and the need to concentrate all our efforts within the framework of the United Nations. Without relying on this Organization with its ever-growing stature, our common endeavour to create a peaceful world would be bound to remain in vain. I am thinking of what Dag Hammarskjold said at the University of Chicago on 1 May 1960:

"Working at the edge of the development of human society is to work on the brink of the unknown. Much of what is done will one day prove to have been of little avail. That is no excuse for the failure to act in accordance with our best understanding, in recognition of its limits but with faith in the ultimate result of the creative evolution in which it is our privilege to co-operate."