84. On behalf of the Government of Guatemala and the delegation which I have the honour to lead, it gives me great pleasure to express to you. Sir, our most hearty congratulations on your election to the office of President of the General Assembly of the United Nations for this session. This most appropriate choice not only is a recognition of your ability and great merits but is also a tribute to your great country, which for many reasons has earned our admiration. Italy is, as it were, heir to the glories of Rome and to the Latin genius which created the universal standards of law. At this time of tribulation for the world, we need to draw our inspiration from that spirit of justice epitomized in the words of one of its most eminent jurists, who defined justice as the constant will to give to each his own.
85. My country's delegation to this session of the United Nations reaffirms before this General Assembly Guatemala's unshakable faith in respect for the principles enshrined in the San Francisco Charter which gave birth to the United Nations, its belief in the equality of the rights of nations large and small, and its firm conviction that our great world Organization will help to solve the various problems that may arise, whether they are economic, social, cultural or of any other type.
86. It is certain that the world is going through one of its worst periods of crisis, that local wars are being waged between various countries and that the threat of a third world war, which would bring our civilization and perhaps even mankind itself to an end, still hangs over us like a horrible nightmare. Only hope in our Organization, a profound belief that the human spirit can rise above its passions and egotism and that man must no longer be the enemy of man, as also respect for the principles and norms of international law, will enable us to find the proper solution to each of the problems Which arise and thus achieve the international peace and security which we so much need and which is the sign and the summation of our world Organization.
87. It cannot be denied that in its twenty years of existence the United Nations has endeavoured to maintain an international legal order; it has established the principle of the legal equality of States and onmany occasions it has found a just and proper settlement for conflicts which threatened the maintenance of international peace, security and justice. The success of those efforts should spur us onto redouble our own efforts to promote the peace of the world which is so greatly threatened today.
88. Within its modest position in the United Nations, Guatemala has always been ready to support, with determination and enthusiasm, all just and appropriate measures for the solution of the great problems afflicting mankind; it has followed, as an invariable rule of conduct, a clear and definite policy of absolute respect for international commitments and it has always been in the vanguard of the fight for the freedom and independence of oppressed peoples. Within the American regional system it has always fully supported, and will continue to support, the aims of that system; it has demonstrated its steadfast solidarity when common objectives, whether political or economic, have been pursued, and it has always been vigilant and active in safeguarding its principles and its way of life, which are now threatened more than ever by wily hidden forces which would destroy the most precious of human values.
89. Guatemala has thus firmly repudiated totalitarian systems and has adopted strong measures to halt the provocation and aggression of communism, reaffirming the American system of law and the democratic aspirations of its peoples. Lastly, as proof of its respect for the norms of international law and its faith in the use of the peaceful means which civilization imposes on States for the settlement of their disputes, Guatemala is happy to announce that a solution is being sought, through the good offices of a friendly State, to its long-standing dispute With the United Kingdom over the territory of Belize. Guatemala's unchanging attitude of respect for the peaceful settlement of conflicts, which is the very foundation of the legal structure of the United Nations, makes it optimistic that the justness of its cause will bring about a settlement in which its rights will be recognized.
90. In the economic sphere, Guatemala hopes that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, as an organ of the General Assembly will help through its permanent body, the Trade and Development Board, to further the efforts of the less-developed countries to improve their economies and will help them to solve the problems they encounter in placing their primary commodities on the world market. We attach special importance to the Committee on Commodities since despite Guatemala's efforts to promote its own development and despite the growth of its industrial sector, which in 1964 was one of the economic sectors with the highest growth rate, namely 6.5 per cent, it is still a country which derives the foreign exchange it needs to finance its development from exporting agricultural commodities such as coffee.
91. The efforts which my country is making to promote development, which in 1964 led to an increase of 9.9 per cent in the gross national product — a high figure compared with the country's growth in previous years — must be supported by a price policy and fair treatment for the Commodities Which we export, so that the balance-of-payments problems of the developing countries will not be aggravated as a result of export barriers. The existence of such barriers must not discourage us in our legitimate desire for economic development.
92. The profound changes that have taken place in the world as a result of great scientific advances and remarkable technological progress have forced the inter-American system to carry out a process of adjustment and accommodation. Nevertheless, when we consider the position of that system and the methods which will enable us to adapt it to the circumstances and requirements of the world of today, we find that we have to revise many of our conventional ideas about international coexistence and cooperation, the development of which makes re-adaptation to specific forms, standards and procedures necessary in order to respond to the new possibilities offered by present-day relations between peoples.
93. Since one of the basic objectives of continental solidarity is the co-ordination of our economies in a spirit of unity, we must draw up economic development programmes on a continental scale and establish bodies which will be able to plan our economic development. This is the responsibility, not of one country or of one area, but of the whole American continent. Anything concerned with the intensification of our trade, the diversification of production and industrialization, foreign and private capital investment and the reduction of restrictions in inter-American trade should be done on the basis of a comprehensive view and a unified pattern; otherwise we shall never achieve unity and economic factors might be viewed in the light of so many different technical factors that the results achieved might in some cases be contradictory and mutually restrictive in their effect.
94. Special consideration should be given to the question of foreign investment. My Government has made a careful analysis of the implications of foreign investment in Guatemala.
95. Guatemala, together with the other Central American Governments, recently issued a statement setting forth the basic principles which will constitute the general rule governing foreign investment; in view of their importance I think I should outline those principles briefly before the Assembly. It is generally agreed that foreign investment is needed to accelerate economic development, since domestic savings are not yet sufficient for that purpose. Particular stress should be laid, however, on the fact that foreign investors, while having the same right to obtain reasonable profits, should also co-operate in developing the recipient country by investing in those sectors which have not been exploited, or have been inadequately exploited, by the nationals of our countries. Moreover, we have concluded that foreign investment is necessary in those fields where the complex technology required, the excessive amount of investment involved or the market requirements and conditions have prevented the establishment of domestic enterprises, with the result that the country’s resources benefit no one. We consider that these ideas are applicable to all the sister countries of America.
96. In our opinion, foreign investors should cooperate in forming a vigorous class of entrepreneurs in the country in which they invest, by enabling nations to participate so that they may acquire the technical knowledge needed to make them more capable and more useful to their country.
97. An important section of the statement to Which I have referred indicates that Governments will give special encouragement to joint ventures, in which foreign capital is associated with domestic capital, and establishes the principle that foreign investors should, during a reasonable period of time, give Central American investors the option to subscribe to and buy capital stock. It also stresses the fact that in order to diversify Central American exports to other countries and regions it will be necessary to encourage investments to be used for the production of exportable goods manufactured with domestic raw materials.
98. I can state that Guatemala will consequently welcome investments from the sister nations of America, knowing that we are all interested in developing our countries fully so that everyday we may become more capable of giving our peoples a better life by eradicating disease, poverty and ignorance, in accordance with the noble principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
99. For that reason, Guatemala hopes that the Governments of capital-exporting countries will guide their investors so that they may adopt attitudes in keeping with the principles I have mentioned and with the desire for balanced progress with which all our countries are imbued.
100. With regard to the establishment of a Latin-American common market, my Government welcomed with great sympathy the proposals made by distinguished economists at the suggestion of the President of Chile. Our sympathy arises from the fact that we have been the most enthusiastic advocates of the programmes for the economic integration of Central America, which we have been carrying out since the beginning of the last decade. We have seen the progress made by our economies as the Central American common market came into being. We have shown the benefit to be derived from the establishment of regional bodies that take positive action such as the Banco Centroamericano de Integración Económica, the Instituto Centroamericano de Investigación y Tecnología Industrial, the Camara Centroamericana de Compensación and others. For these reasons, we are convinced that the expansion of consumer markets is essential to promote the development of our countries at a faster rate than is possible with the inadequate markets provided by our respective countries. It is nevertheless our duty to point out that our achievements are the fruit of many years of preparation, during which we made little progress at first, despite our natural impatience; as we advanced, however, we saw the road extend until we reached the point we have now attained. We are still unsatisfied; of course, we still have a long way to go, but everyday we move forward with greater enthusiasm and conviction. For these reasons, Guatemala congratulates the other countries of the continent on their firm determination to solve the problem of our economic and social behaviour in unity.
101. We welcome the proposed establishment of a Latin American common market, because we have seen that It is clearly understood that the less-developed countries of America require special treatment, since many aspects of their agriculture, industry, mining and in general all their economic activities must be strengthened before they can form part of the same market with other economies which are more advanced and more integrated at the domestic level. This important plan states at various points that the less-developed countries, among which we must include Guatemala, will need more time to attain their goals and to free their trade with the other Latin American countries, and that it may be possible to grant them priority in connexion with foreign investments and financial assistance, electricity supply, improvement of communications, technical assistance and certain other matters. These proposals, which will, we feel sure, be accepted by all the countries concerned as the plan crystallizes, demonstrate the great American spirit with which the authors are imbued and proves their great ability to understand the economic problems afflicting our peoples.
102. Guatemala is therefore thinking of joining the great Latin American economic integration movement, provided that the instruments establishing the common market are flexible enough to permit effective and opportune participation for the benefit of our peoples and the American community as a whole. In compliance with Central American treaties, however, Guatemala will take the final decision jointly with the other Central American countries, so that we may act as a single group.	
103. With regard to the efforts directed towards the political unification of Central America, in the statement which I have the honour to make at the 1301st meeting of this Assembly, in 1964,1 described in broad outline the successes achieved in the Central American integration process, some of the projects that were being carried out in connexion with that process and the plans that were being prepared with a view to achieving the reorganization of Central America in the near future.
104. I am very glad to be able to inform you today that the Central American Republics have taken new and positive steps in the momentous task of reconstructing their former national entity. On 30 March 1965 the new Charter of the Organization of Central American States came into force and on that occasion there took place the First Special Conference of Central American Foreign Ministers, which took all the steps necessary for the functioning of our Organization at the present stage.
105. In accordance with this new fundamental instrument and the decisions of the above-mentioned Conference of Foreign Ministers, the Organization of Central American States possesses the following organs for the attainment of its objectives: the Conference of Heads of State, the supreme organ; the Conference of Foreign Ministers, the principal organ; the Executive Council, a permanent organ composed of the Central American Foreign Ministers or their special representatives; the Legislative Council, composed of three representatives of each of the legislative authorities of the Member States; the Central American Court of Justice, composed of the Presidents of the judicial authorities of those States; the Central American Economic Council, composed of their respective Ministers of Economic Affairs; the Cultural and Educational Council, composed of the Central American Ministers of Education; the Defence Council, composed of the Ministers of Defence or equivalent officials, according to the rank and functions assigned to them in the various Member States, and other subsidiary organs.
106. I must state clearly and categorically that as far as the Government of Guatemala is concerned the reorganization of the Organization of Central American States and the progress achieved in the implementation of the various integration programmes are only steps in the process designed to restore the unity of Central America as soon as possible.
107. The Government of Guatemala considers that this objective is a historical imperative and a mandate from the people of Central America, who ever since the unhappy day when the Federal Republic of Central America was dissolved have expressed their firm and unshakable determination to reconstruct it. For the people of Central America, the return to their former unity has ceased to be a mere dream; it has become their most noble and most urgent task.
108. At the end of 1963, in faithful interpretation of that mandate, I submitted to the Central. American Foreign Ministers the draft principles for the Central American community, to which I referred in my statement to the nineteenth session of the General Assembly [1301st meeting, paras. 11-25]. As I said in that statement, the draft was considered by a special commission, which made very few amendments and prepared a report which was to be taken up by the Conference of Central American Foreign Ministers.
109. The first Special Conference of Central American Foreign Ministers, in resolution XIII, requested the Executive Council to draw up a draft Convention on the Central American Community, taking into account the draft principles submitted by my country. The draft Charter of the Central American Community has already been submitted and will be considered at the next regular Conference of Central American Foreign Ministers. The draft Charter, like the draft principles, envisages the establishment of supranational organs, capable of continuing the integration process.
110. As I have already said, Guatemala is deeply concerned about the serious problems confronting our Organization. We lament the fact that the disarmament problem remains unsolved. We also deplore the continued existence of the problem of divided peoples and the fact that, despite all that has been said on all occasions concerning the self-determination of peoples, these countries have never been given an opportunity to organize themselves but have been maintained in a state which is contrary to their wishes and their destinies. We regret that local wars are destroying world peace and that communism, using international subversion, which is a new form of intervention, is attacking peaceful and democratic nations,, disrupting their development. It is a source of satisfaction, however, that thanks to the efforts of the Security Council and the Secretary-General a cease-fire has been achieved in the armed conflict between India and Pakistan, two friends of Guatemala, and we cherish the hope that this conflict may be resolved by peaceful means. We hope that the Viet-Nam problem, which has already claimed so many human lives, will be solved in the same way. We note with satisfaction that the colonized peoples are rapidly attaining independence and we are pleased that new countries are joining our Organization, which is thus fulfilling its universal mission. Lastly, we eagerly welcome the holy Father’s decision to address all the peoples of the world from this rostrum in an appeal for universal peace. Guatemala, the vast majority of whose people are Catholic, echoes the appeal of His Holiness, which reflects Christ's doctrine of universal love for all men.
111. I should like to refer briefly to the process of political and institutional reorganization which is now being carried out in my country. It is common knowledge that the present Government of Guatemala was established in order to put an end to anarchy, demagogy and political opportunism, to restore administrative morality and to eliminate communist subversion, which at the present time represents a serious threat to all Latin American countries. My Government has achieved its objectives: it has pacified the country and restored its economy, and a National Constituent Assembly has already issued the new Constitution, which was promulgated on 15 September 1965 and is one of the most progressive as far as the protection of human rights and other social guarantees are concerned. In accordance with the decisions of the Assembly, general elections will be held shortly, so that the constitutional régime may enter into full force. In addition to these measures, my Government has forged ahead with all its public works programmes, principally those relating to new roads, electrification programmes, schools, housing, hospitals and many other works; it has given a vigorous impetus to national education and has done its best to solve our other social and economic problems in order to lay the foundations for the country's future development.
112. We know that we have powerful enemies, we know that perennial malcontents are conspiring in the shadows to prevent us from progressing; we know that international subversion is lying in wait to destroy us and to demolish the foundations of democracy and individual freedom. But we have faith in the future, we have faith in our principles and we have faith in the United Nations as a basis for peaceful coexistence.
113. In conclusion, my delegation expresses its fervent hopes for the success of this Assembly, in the deep conviction that this will redound to the benefit of the peoples throughout the world who have placed their hopes in our Organization.