
114.     I should like to congratulate His Excellency, Mr. Fanfani, the distinguished Foreign Minister of Italy, on his election to the Presidency of the twentieth session of the General Assembly. The overwhelming support which he received is a measure of the high esteem in which he is held. It was with a feeling of sadness that we learned of the unfortunated accident he has suffered. I wish to extend to him our most sincere wishes for a quick recovery, so that the Assembly may again benefit from his wise counsel and able leadership.

115.    As the representative of a nation which has made invaluable contributions to the development of the rule of law and justice, and as an eminent scholar, he brings to this high office outstanding qualifications for the discharge of the Assembly's important functions. In greeting him, I speak in the name of a country which has maintained the most cordial and friendly relations with his. In fact, the bonds that link our two nations are cemented by centuries-old ties of mutual exchange in culture and learning. New light was shed on these exchanges by the proceedings of an international congress held in Rome last April under the auspices of the Academy of Lincei.

116.    As for the exchange of envoys between the two countries, may I mention that the first emissary from the Republic of Venice, Katherino Zfino, was sent to the Court of Persia in 1470. But, on a lighter note, allow me to recall that in the year 1294 the Venetian Marco Polo, acting as emissary for Kublai Khan, carried out the delicate mission of accompanying from the Court of Pekin to Tabriz Princess Kukachin — a young beauty — for marriage with Arghun, the then Monarch of Persia.

117.    We meet again in a climactic period of world affairs and the problems before us are numerous, complex and far-reaching in importance. Some of these we know but too well, for they reappear year after year and we have not yet found solutions for them. Others are new but fraught with potential danger, reminding us that the quest for peace is a lengthy process, demanding renewed and sustained efforts on the part of us all.

118.    We still vividly recall the manner in which this world Assembly, less than a year ago, was partially incapacitated by the financial crisis. Fortunately, the nineteenth session, which began its work under the shadow of despair, ended on a note of confidence and hope. However, the therapeutic effect of the shock we experienced may have proved useful; for, after all, it made us conscious of how close our Organization had been driven to the brink of total ineffectiveness.

119.    The United Nations is perhaps far from being perfect, but it does afford us an opportunity to harmonize our efforts for peaceful coexistence. It also opens an avenue for peace through international cooperation and is truly our best hope in a world where "the instruments of war have far outpaced the instruments of peace".

120.    Having survived this financial crisis, it is our earnest hope that the Assembly will now regain the strength and unity it requires for the discharge of its high functions.

121.    In this connexion, I should like to pay a tribute to His Excellency Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey, the President of the nineteenth session of the General Assembly, for the constructive spirit and objectivity with which his leadership was instrumental in breaking the deadlock. Similarly, I should like to express to our dedicated Secretary-General U Thant our sincere thanks and appreciation for his guidance and assistance in helping the United Nations out of adversity.

122.    While the financial crisis seems to have been surmounted for the moment, the underlying causes of the malady still remain. We must not delude ourselves into believing that the troubles are all over. On the contrary, we must take advantage • of the respite we have gained to get on with the business of tackling the basic political differences.

123.    What appears to be a financial difficulty hampering the work of our Organization is, in fact, a reflection of a constitutional controversy. It involves not only the relations between the great Powers, but also those between the great and the small, and the future security of all.

124.    As the only alternative to war rests in the development of concerted action through the United Nations, and as war in this nuclear age could engulf the small as well as the great, the small should assume their share of responsibility for the maintenance of peace. The latter's participation in peace-keeping operations not only conforms with the basic democratic principle of the need for representation, but also constitutes an essential factor in the development of a body of law and general principles governing the conduct of our relations.

125.    Our position as a small State, stemming from the desire to have a share in ensuring our security and survival through collective action, as well as from the recognition of present world realities, is very clear. As we have already stated, we recognize the primary responsibility of the Security Council in peace-keeping operations in accordance with Article 24 of the United Nations Charter. We also firmly believe that the General Assembly has its share of responsibility, which is complementary to that of the Security Council, in the maintenance of international peace and security. We further maintain that should the Security Council fail to act in a given situation which might threaten the peace, and thereby our existence, we are entitled to act through the General Assembly, both by law and instinct, and are supported in our belief by the democratizing process which the concept of collective security has undergone for the last twenty years. This position is not only sound, democratic and just, but also necessary, for the fact remains that collective security through five-Power co-operation has not materialized during the twenty years of the existence of the United Nations.

126.    Regarding the question of financing future peacekeeping operations, we have often expressed the view that the expenses covering such operations should be borne by the entire membership. Moreover, the scale of assessments for each Member's contribution should be based upon a number of basic principles, mainly, the special responsibility of the permanent members of the Security Council and the financial ability of the developing countries. We are glad to note that these views have been incorporated in the major guidelines contained in the report of the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly. 

127.    The importance we attach to the principle of collective security on as wide a basis as possible may be observed not only by our words but also by our deeds. In the interest of developing an effective United Nations capacity for keeping the peace, His Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah has already indicated that the Iranian Government will hold in readiness a detachment of the Iranian Army for call to duty under the United Nations flag. This detachment consists of one airborne rifle company and supporting elements, one air group, and a third group composed of supervisors and liaison officers. Our contribution, though modest in terms of world situations, is offered at great national sacrifice, since our resources and efforts are geared to national development projects.

128.    Concurrent with our efforts to make the United Nations peace-keeping operations effective, we must also try to revitalize and improve upon the Organization's procedures for the pacific settlement of disputes. In this connexion, we welcome the initiative of the United Kingdom Government in recommending the inscription of the item on peaceful settlement of disputes in the Assembly's agenda [A/5964], A study of the vast and rich record of the pacific settlement of disputes of the last twenty years could bring into sharp focus the strong as well as the weak elements of our experience, which might help us in improving the present methods and devising new ones. And this is of prime importance at a time when the need for fresh ways and means is being so sharply felt in solving a new and most threatening crisis.

129.    To maintain peace through international cooperation, either by resorting to peace-keeping operations or using the method of pacific settlement, is no longer a matter of hope but of necessity. It is a matter in which we all have a role, the great by virtue of their capacity to promote or destroy such cooperation, the small by virtue of their susceptibility to complete annihilation. We all have the responsibility to ensure that our actions completely conform to the prerequisite for the promotion of the rule of law as well as justice for all through the various organs of the United Nations. Can anyone overlook the law which conflicts with its interests, and at the same time admonish others for doing so? Can anyone refuse to implement United Nations resolutions — in particular those related to international peace and security —which are not to its liking, and at the same time urge others to settle their outstanding disputes by peaceful means?

130.    In this connexion it is befitting to refer to the Indo-Pakistan armed conflict which is viewed by my Government with the gravest concern. For seventeen years the Kashmir dispute brewed turbulently under a Security Council-imposed truce, designed to permit the protagonists to settle their dispute amicably. For seventeen years the dispute remained deadlocked and the Security Council's few attempts failed to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions until the surface calm was once again shattered.

131.    The establishment of a cease-fire between Pakistan and India at the instance of the Security Council was a matter of profound relief throughout the world. However, heartened as we are by the ending of bloodshed, the United Nations cannot lower its guard until a lasting settlement is found in accordance with the Security Council resolutions. A settlement, to be durable, must be achieved not on the basis of political expediency but mainly on the basis of law and justice; that is, on the basis of the principle of self-determination, to which both parties had previously subscribed.

132.    There are added reasons for the people and the Government of Iran to be disturbed by the present conflict between India and Pakistan. We have always maintained friendly relations with India, and our cultural ties can be traced to the beginning of history. With Pakistan we are linked by deep-rooted ties of brotherhood and religion, which are further cemented by our partnership in the Central Treaty Organization and in regional co-operation for development. This chronic conflict, which diverts precious resources from the needs of the people and drains the energies of both sides, serves the interests of no one, and war wall always be an ever-present threat as long as the quarrel remains unsettled. Therefore, we see no alternative for the Security Council but to pursue vigorously the implementation of its own resolutions as it pledged to do in paragraph 4 of resolution 211 (1965) of 20 September 1965.

133.    Last year, before this Assembly [1292nd meeting], the Foreign. Minister of Iran expressed the grave concern of my Government over the situation prevailing in another troubled area. I refer to the still unresolved Cyprus problem. In the view of my delegation, in order to reach a lasting and equitable settlement in Cyprus, one should always bear in mind the existence of contractual obligations as well as the existence of separate communities on the island. No viable solution of the problem can be conceived if the legitimate and legal rights and interests of both communities are not preserved. In this respect we should like to reiterate our conviction that safeguarding the undeniable rights of the Turkish Cypriots constitutes a basic condition for a lasting settlement of the Cyprus question, in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We believe that the General Assembly's action should, therefore, aim at helping all parties concerned to reach an agreed solution through negotiations based on the mutual interests of the two communities, in line with the Security Council resolution of 4 March 1964 [186 (1964)].

134.    Our preoccupation with the immediate problem of armed conflict or political disputes should not deter us from dealing with urgent economic and social issues of international concern.

135.    In today's world one of the vital questions is that of development. In a century where man is reaching for the stars, all inhabitants of this planet should be allowed to share equally in the expanding wonders of science, which have captivated man's imagination and given him the tools for his rapid development.

136.    Iran, like many of the nations represented here, is now engaged in a great battle for development. In the process we have learned that in this field traditional means are not sufficient to accomplish the task. We have had, therefore, no choice but to take short-cuts by devising methods enabling us to proceed with much greater speed towards the goal we have set for ourselves. These methods are embodied in a charter of great revolutionary reforms enacted by His Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah, aimed at uprooting the very causes of under-development.

137.    Archaic ways of farming are disappearing under the constant pressure of agricultural reform. Modernization and mechanization of agriculture have received priority in our development programmes, and major works have been accomplished throughout our country.

138.    However, the task we have set ourselves does not consist only of changing the physical aspects of our country by multiplying industries and creating artificial lakes and dams; it does not consist either of accelerating production at all levels; but it aims primarily at shattering the feudal bonds and transforming the relations of men among themselves. Development for us has a much deeper meaning than its conventional term implies. The vicious circle of under-development is, among other things, in our opinion, a mental state, an obsolete conception of life. Accelerated and sustained progress will start only when a profound change takes place in people's outlook, and this change in turn will generate new ideas and new expectations. That is where and when the problem of education appears sharply in a new light and becomes of primordial importance, for there cannot he true development without mass education.

139.    As proclaimed in the message of the Shahinshah to this forum:
"A great menace which hampers the good harmony and just equilibrium of our globe is ignorance, a terrible evil affecting more than a thousand million human beings who are thus deprived of the enjoyment of one of man's most fundamental rights: the right to education." [A/6024.]

140.    Fortunately, co-operative efforts in waging war on illiteracy have recently acquired new momentum. In response to the Shahinshah's initiative, a UNESCO-sponsored World Congress of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy was convened in Teheran from 8 to 19 September 1965. That highly successful Congress devised ways and means of carrying out a world campaign against mass illiteracy. During the debates the problem of illiteracy on a world-wide basis, and in all its aspects, was examined, and the gravity of the question was acknowledged. It was solemnly affirmed that the total eradication of illiteracy at present constitutes one of the most important problems in economic and social development. It was established that illiteracy, which more particularly affects the developing countries, accentuates their unfavourable position. Illiteracy, furthermore, affects not only the people directly involved but the whole of mankind, whose progress it hinders. This evil is, therefore, a common disease which concerns the developed as well as the under-developed countries and must be fought by the union of all forces, means and resources.

141.    Among the principles embodied in the resolutions of the Teheran Literacy Congress was the one stated in the historic appeal of the Shahinshah, according to which all Governments should provide more substantial amounts towards the elimination of world illiteracy and forgo part of their military expenditure for this purpose. This principle has already been put into effect in Iran's successful campaign against illiteracy, mainly through the diversion of draftees from military service to duties with the Literacy Corps.

142.    My country was gratified to play host to the World Congress on the Eradication of Illiteracy, for it is deeply conscious of the importance as well as the nobility of this task. In this connexion, I should like to thank the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Fanfani, for the warm support which he has given to the message of His Imperial Majesty by distributing it as an official document [A/6024] and directing the Assembly's attention to it.

143.    The campaign against illiteracy was one of the points which His Holiness Pope Paul VI specifically referred to in his statement before the Assembly. For the United Nations and those Member countries involved in this campaign it was heartening to hear His Holiness describe this effort as a magnificent work which is "deserving of everyone's praise and support, including our own" [1347th meeting, para. 43].

144.    Another heartening trend is the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which during its very brief existence has made considerable progress. The Trade and Development Board has already been created, and a number of subsidiary bodies have, come into being to deal with the various aspects of trade and development. Moreover, the nature and implications of the problem of international trade and development have been identified. But the success of our common effort in closing the ever-widening gap of per capita incomes between rich and poor nations will depend ultimately on the co-operation of the developed countries. Their acceptance of the recommendations of the Conference, as a beginning, will provide a good basis for the much needed following-up action.

145.    International co-operation on a regional basis to wrestle with socio-economic ills has also been increasing rapidly. In our region, for instance, much has been accomplished by the co-operative efforts of Turkey, Pakistan and Iran within the framework of Regional Co-operation for Development (RCD). In July 1965, the RCD Ministerial Council adopted new far-reaching measures to further the promotion of economic and cultural co-operation among the three countries. Already a number of joint-purpose enterprises have been undertaken or are under study in the fields of technical co-operation, air transportation, shipping, petroleum, petro-chemicals, tourism, information, trade, cultural co-operation, and others.

146.    We have not failed to foster better relations with other neighbouring countries. Let me mention in this connexion an agreement on economic and technical co-operation between Iran and the Soviet Union which was signed early this month. Aside from yielding concrete advantages in the economic and technical fields, the agreement, we are sure, will further enhance the good relations between the two countries.

147.    In the course of 1964, international co-operation for the total abolition of colonialism, in accordance with the United Nations Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, has been significant. The Special Committee of Twenty- four, of which Iran is a member, made a valuable contribution to the cause of decolonization by holding meetings in Africa. In addition to obtaining first-hand information on conditions in colonial Territories, it inspired greater hope and confidence in the United Nations interest in and support for the liberation of people from colonialism.

148.    The Iranian Government had the opportunity earlier in this session of the Assembly to welcome the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore to membership of the United Nations through the voice of the Chairman of the Japanese delegation [1332nd meeting]. May I now add my personal greetings and express my confidence that the United Nations will benefit from the wisdom these new Members will impart and the contribution they will make to the work of our Organization.

149.    In conclusion, it is our earnest hope that as the Assembly's nineteenth session witnessed the turning of despair into hope, the twentieth session, and those to follow, will witness the translating of hope into action. I am confident that, with the co-operative spirit which marked the end of the last session, an acceptable formula can be found for peace-keeping operations. While the United Nations capacity to keep the peace effectively should be strengthened, the United Nations functional approach to peace must likewise be reinforced. In this day and age, when modern science and technology have rendered man's dream of the conquest of hunger and poverty, disease and illiteracy, into attainable objectives, we must redouble our efforts in a concerted attack against those social ills impeding economic and social development. And with good fortune we may be able to establish a durable peace with justice.