1. It has become a tradition for heads of delegations, when speaking for the first time in the general debate, to congratulate the President of the General Assembly on having been summoned to this high office and to wish him success in his work.
2. For me, as head of the Italian delegation, it is a very moving occasion as I comply with this tradition. At the same time, I should like to express to all delegations Italy's warmest gratitude for the token of esteem which the Assembly has bestowed upon the President.
3. As Mr. Fanfani said in his opening address to the Assembly [1332nd meeting], the honour that has been conferred upon him extends through Mm to our country. It is with sincere gratitude and affection that the Italian delegation in its turn wishes the President every success in the task assigned to him at this critical moment for world peace.
4. I should like also to express sincere good wishes to the new States that have been admitted to the United Nations, namely the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore, and to welcome them into this family of nations.
5. The universal confidence in the successful outcome of the work of this twentieth session is fresh proof of the vitality of the United Nations and the reason for that confidence is that the United Nations is still today the strongest bulwark of peace.
6. The experience of the past lends support to the hopes we place in the United Nations, for the past gives us the occasion to remind the critics and the pessimists that a similar institution — the League of Nations, founded in 1919 — was never able to celebrate its twentieth anniversary, since by 1939 the world was already in the first throes of the Second World War.
7. Today, however, we can attend this twentieth session of the United Nations General Assembly more convinced than ever that peace is mankind's
most precious possession and that violence and the brute force of arms, far from solving international problems, serve only to aggravate them, as was rightly pointed out by H.E. Mr. Leitão da Cunha, the Foreign Prime Minister of Brazil, and H.E. Mr. Goldberg, the head of the United States delegation.
8. Our common hopes must not, however, lead us to underestimate the difficulties of an international situation which we must face with renewed faith in the validity of the purposes and principles that our Organization has set itself.
9. It is these principles of solidarity and peaceful co-operation among all nations that have constantly guided the Italian Government in its efforts, in full unison with its allies, to seek every possible opportunity for discussion and a relaxation of tension in order to promote international co-operation in freedom, justice and security.
10. The visit paid recently to the Latin American countries by Mr. Guiseppe Saragat, the President of the Italian Republic, was also prompted by this policy of promoting international solidarity by strengthening the bonds of friendship between nations and between regional groups of countries. By this visit, Italy wished to consolidate the fraternal ties between peoples that are so closely linked and at the same time to reaffirm, to those countries which share its cultural and historical heritage, its desire to further their development and their ever more active participation in the peaceful progress of the world. Basing its action on these sentiments and aims, Italy counts itself among the countries that are resolved to support the peace-keeping mission of the United Nations and, at the same time, to remove the obstacles to its progress.
11. In his opening address, Mr. Fanfani observed that the Assembly session was opening at a moment when there was bloodshed in several parts of Asia and that we must combat the tendency systematically to avoid taking a stand on major world problems. If we confine ourselves to reiterating appeals to common sense and humanity, he added, and if those appeals continue to remain a dead letter, an irremediable crisis for the United Nations is bound to ensue.
12. But the events of the past few days have shown us, to our satisfaction, that for the first time in a long period the Security Council has effectively assumed its role — thanks to unanimity — in the conflict between India and Pakistan. We fervently hope that, with the Assembly's support, this unanimity will remain effective and operative, especially in view of the recent most regrettable violations of the truce.

13. No one, however, can fail to see that the important results achieved in the direction of a peaceful settlement of this conflict have not removed the serious difficulties which prevent the Organization from fulfilling satisfactorily and generally its essential purpose, namely, the maintenance of peace and security in every country of the world. It therefore seems to me that it would be appropriate to consider here the facts of the situation which, as I see it, faces the Organization.
14. The difficulties already mentioned by a number of other speakers — among them Mr. Vidal Zaglio, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay [1334th meeting] — arise first and foremost from a need for closer harmony among the principal Member States in order to ensure more efficient functioning of the institutional organs, as the Secretary-General said last June.
15. The second problem is the wide discrepancy between the means of action which the United Nations has at its command and the weighty and complex tasks assigned to it by the San Francisco Charter.
16. Lastly, it should be borne in mind that the United Nations was founded on the principle of universality and that unless it has this universal nature it cannot efficiently perform its principal function, the maintenance of peace.
17. If these are the causes of our present difficulties, it remains to be seen by what means we can satisfy the hopes placed in our Organization by the peoples who expect it to bring peace in security and universal advancement.
18. With regard to the first difficulty, the desired harmony among the States bearing primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace demands ever greater efforts on their part to achieve a proper reconciliation of their respective positions and a thorough appreciation of the needs and aspirations of all peoples.	
19. As for improving the functioning of the principal organs of the United Nations, we have already taken a step in the right direction by giving the Security Council and the economic and Social Council a broader and more balanced membership. We still have to improve the functioning of the General Assembly, bearing in mind its increased membership and the necessity for co-ordination between its role and that of the Security Council. At the same time we must redouble our efforts to settle the disputes and controversies still outstanding as quickly as possible, in a spirit of mutual understanding, as was pointed out this morning by Mr. Zavala Ortiz, the Foreign Minister of Argentina.
20. A useful start has already been made on a study of the organizational problems by the Committee of Thirty-Three.
21. We must now extend and intensify our search for ways and means of constantly improving the functioning of the United Nations. I wonder whether it might not be advisable for the Assembly to adopt a resolution for this purpose and for the additional purpose of eliminating the present disparity between the resources available to the United Nations and the aims assigned to it by the Charter. The United Kingdom proposal for the discussion of the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes, which is already on the agenda of our Assembly [item 99], may provide a useful basis for consideration of the question and enable us to suggest methods and procedures for obtaining positive results.
22. As regards the problem of financial resources, we note that, thanks to the work of the Committee of Thirty-Three and the good will shown on all sides, we have already come close to a solution. It has indeed become possible for the organs of the United Nations to resume the normal functioning which is essential to the attainment of the objectives of the Organization. In this connexion, Mr. Paul Martin, the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs, has expressed the hope that many Member States will decide to restore the financial equilibrium of the United Nations by making special contributions. The Italian Government, in response to the initiative taken by the United Kingdom Government last June and to the solemn appeal made to Member States by the Secretary-General, endorses this invitation and has already decided to submit a bill to Parliament authorizing payment of a special contribution of $1.5 million.
23. It is obvious, however, that there would be no purpose in uniting or supplementing all the means at the disposal of the United Nations unless we can tackle the fundamental problem of giving the Organization the universality that its very existence presupposes, without impairing its essential homogeneity.
24. To satisfy this demand of universality with homogeneity, the United Nations family must embrace the entire international community and each Member State must fulfil its obligations under the Charter. At the present time, this would mean the return of States which, like Indonesia, have temporarily withdrawn and the admission of those which are still absent. We are well aware that the latter point involves real difficulties. We know the difficulties in the case of Germany, over which still hangs the problem of peaceful and democratic reunification.
25. We are well aware of the extreme positions that have been adopted with regard to the representation of China in the United Nations. So long as these positions remain so clearly opposed and their protagonists persist in the paths they have hitherto been following, not only will it be difficult to find a solution, but we shall run the risk of prolonging a sterile controversy.
26. There is no doubt that the attitude of Peking towards the vital problems of disarmament and the peaceful settlement of the bitter conflicts going on at present scarcely helps to dispel the serious objections of those who rightly question whether conditions are favourable for a just solution of the problem. 
27. In view of these facts, it is perhaps justifiable to raise certain questions to stimulate consideration of the problem.
 
28. A first question might be addressed to those who, greatly over-simplifying the matter, underestimate the gravity of the problem. They might be asked whether they have already done — and can still do — anything to persuade the Peking Government to adopt an attitude in regard to both the problem of disarmament and the present disputes that would absolve it from the accusations made against it. If Peking really wants peace, there is a testing-ground ready for it today: Viet-Nam.
29. A second question might be addressed to everyone in general and, in particular, to those who today regard the problem as almost insoluble. It might be asked whether it would not be worth while instituting, within the Organization, through the appropriate procedures and instruments by innovations if necessary, an objective analysis of the latest data on the problem and its difficulties, and of the conditions, methods and stages by which it might be solved in full consistency with the principles of the United Nations.
30. Reflection upon these two questions might start a movement that would bring together for our consideration, from various sides, the elements likely to lead to a final solution without creating fresh problems.
31. We do not, of course, delude ourselves to the point of believing that by 21 December — the date set forth for the closing of the session — all the necessary elements will have been gathered so that we can celebrate Christmas Day 1965 as a great day for peace. But we should like to hope that before the opening of the twenty-first session the proofs which we await from Peking and the elements gathered by the Organization will allow a decisive word to be spoken for the final settlement of so serious a question.
32. The Italian delegation will not fail to follow the course of the general discussion on this question, as on all others, with attention and confidence and will possibly revert to this subject later.
33. Besides the questions of primary importance for the very existence of our Organization, there is another series of political problems.
34. I should like to refer, first of all, to a question which has always aroused great interest at the various sessions of the General Assembly, as being the most significant expression of the changes that have occurred within the international community.
35. The trend towards association, which in such varied ways and for such varied reasons is proving irresistible in the world today, the recognition of the fundamental rights of the human person which the conscience of the world community is now extending to the personality of peoples, demands that the whole range of problems known as decolonization problems shall be solved once and for all.
36. Whereas in the past history of international law numerous forms of colonial dependency were to be found, today we must recognize finally and unreservedly the principle of the right to independence of all peoples having the necessary qualifications for organizing themselves into independent State Communities.
37. During the five years that have elapsed since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 196(V great strides have been made towards its implementation. There are still a few cases where the situation is static and does not satisfy the aspirations to freedom and independence which the modern world affirms, but we should like to hope that understanding and broadmindedness will prevail, resulting in solutions that will take into account, on a basis of general collaboration, the inexorable drive of the peoples of the world towards independence.
38. All the speakers who have preceded me have pointed out that serious conflicts today are causing mourning and suffering throughout the world.
39. Italy was profoundly distressed to learn of the outbreak of hostilities between two great countries of ancient civilization, India and Pakistan. From the very first day it appealed to those two peoples, both friends of Italy, to seek out the way to agreement. From Santiago, on 19 September, the President of the Italian Republic and the President of Chile renewed this appeal. For this reason we warmly welcomed the initial action undertaken by Secretary- General U Thant to bring about a cessation of hostilities and the subsequent appeal made to the two parties by the Security Council. We should like at this point to express to the Governments of India and Pakistan our satisfaction at their wise decision to comply with the Security Council’s request and we hope that it will be possible, through prompt negotiations and good faith, to arrive at a peaceful settlement of the political issues underlying the conflict, without disturbing the truce that has been established.
40. In the meantime, by way of giving concrete evidence of its interest in the United Nations’ work of pacification in this area, the Italian Government has decided to place at the disposal of the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan a first team of observer officers, to be sent to Kashmir to join the other Italian forces already, posted there.
41. With regard to the serious Viet-Namese problem too, Italy is prepared, as it has repeatedly stated, to support any steps — particularly by the United Nations — which may really lead to negotiations for a speedy and peaceful, and at the same time, equitable and lasting, solution of the questions which provoked the hostilities; only this morning, this fact was very well brought out by Mr. Bourguiba, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia. We cannot but regret, however, that so far various endeavours made in good faith and with constructive intentions have not been followed up but have met with categorical objections, whether relating to the goals at which Hanoi is aiming or to the prerequisites for any negotiations is not clear. We think that, after the statements on this subject which were made by the United States Government and confirmed in this Assembly [1334th meeting] by Mr. Goldberg, the Head of the United States delegation, opportunities and occasions should again be sought for all parties concerned to meet in a constructive way.
 
42. Another problem that has fortunately passed the stage of armed violence but is still giving rise to concern is the problem of Cyprus, which involves countries that are our friends and are particularly close to us in the Mediterranean region.
43. We appreciated the efforts made by the Secretary-General, by the United Nations mediators and by the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, to which we have contributed and in direct form; and we are prepared to support any solutions that are acceptable to the parties principally concerned, provided that the treaties and principles of international law are duly taken into account.
44. Assuming that the existing conflicts can be settled or almost settled, we must think about preventing new ones. This brings us to the problem of disarmament or, to be more accurate, the series of problems involved in the general question of disarmament.
45. The Italian Government has, on various occasions and in every forum, reaffirmed its strong determination to co-operate as actively as possible in the achievement of general and complete disarmament and in the implementation of any other measures which may reduce tension and halt the arms race, and it has done everything in its power to promote a resumption and intensification of the negotiations on disarmament.
46. In my opinion, the results of recent work both at the Headquarters of the United Nations and at Geneva are on the whole positive, although once again the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament was unfortunately unable to reach concrete conclusions.
47. The renewed contact between East and West at Geneva, With the participation of the non-aligned countries, has helped to create a better climate, which has also been fostered by the extensive friendly personal contacts between the representatives during their visit to Italy.
	
48. But in addition to achieving these psychological results, which are not to be disparaged, the Eighteen-Nation Committee submitted to the Assembly a report [A/5986] to which are annexed concrete proposals of not inconsiderable interest. I refer both to the two memoranda prepared by the eight delegations of non-aligned countries and to the proposals made by the Western delegations on the prevention of the further spread of nuclear weapons.
49. For the first time at Geneva the Conference was presented with a draft general treaty to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons which, if concluded, would eliminate once and for all the ever more threatening dangers of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The draft submitted by the United States and supported by the other Western delegations has not yet been accepted by the Soviet Union, which, through Mr. Gromyko, its Minister for Foreign Affairs, submitted its own draft to the Assembly at the meeting on 24 September [1355th meeting].
50. We felt, however, that the countries not possessing nuclear power should not remain inactive if there is to be much more delay in the signing of a treaty guaranteeing the security of all and therefore of those countries, too. They should take the initiative in renouncing national control of nuclear weapons for a certain time, in the hope that in the meantime the nuclear States will stop developing such weapons and then start gradually dismantling their arsenals. This is the idea which Mr. Fanfani, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy, put to the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on 29 July 1965, in a statement which evoked widespread interest.
51. This idea was immediately supported by the majority of the delegations of non-aligned countries in the Eighteen-Nation Committee and was regarded as constructive by many Governments. For this reason, Italy thought it would be useful to submit to the Eighteen-Nation Committee the draft declaration which is now before the Assembly. I hope that the Assembly, though it cannot take action on draft treaties, will consider this draft and, finding it consonant with its own objectives, will support it and refer it to the Eighteen-Nation Committee to be put into final shape.
52. Of course, our proposal does not pretend to solve the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It is a bridge along the road to the final goal of a true solution. We consider that, if this proposal were accepted by a large number of nonnuclear States and particularly by the countries which are nearest to acquiring nuclear capacity, it would at least provide a respite in this fatal nuclear arms race.
53. We steadfastly hope that, if no more decisive proposals for a treaty are submitted to it, the Assembly will endorse this appeal by Italy with the weight of its political authority and moral force.
54. Naturally, there are many other disarmament problems besides that of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons on the agenda and they will have to be considered by the Assembly. In this way, by reaffirming the need to achieve the desired results, the Assembly will be able to encourage the continuation of negotiations by the appropriate organ, thus empowering the Eighteen-Nation Committee to continue its work.
55. The Disarmament Commission has also submitted to the Assembly a resolution on the convening of a World Disarmament Conference. The position of the Italian delegation on this problem is already known. We reaffirm that we are, generally speaking, in favour of this Conference, which could associate all the countries of the world in the achievement of general and complete disarmament. In order, however, to ensure that all will participate in this Conference, it should not be held until there are reasonable prospects of universal attendance, which is one of the essential prerequisites for success.
56. Before speaking at greater length about the economic problems on the agenda, I should like to make special mention of one which is closely linked to the problems of disarmament and to which my delegation attaches overriding importance. I refer to the allocation of the resources released by disarmament to activities that can promote the advancement of the developing countries.
57. In this connexion, looking ahead to the solemn visit which the Assembly is to receive on 4 October, I should like once again to recall the message which His Holiness Pope Paul VI gave to the world on 4 December 1964 when he was at Bombay. This lofty appeal — urging the nations to halt the arms race and to devote their resources and energies, or at least part of the resources spent on armaments, to extending brotherly help to the peoples who are demanding a higher level of living — had an encouraging echo in our Assembly.	
58. Following a suggestion made by the Italian delegation and by other delegations, the Disarmament Commission adopted by a very large majority, almost unanimously, a resolution which is now before us and which invites us to consider this important problem.
59. I consider that the relationship between disarmament and the economic and social advancement of the peoples, which has already been recognized by the Disarmament-Commission, is extremely important in itself, even if for the time being it is only the expression of a principle and a moral duty. We are aware of the difficulties involved in transposing this idea to the practical plane, but are convinced that it will be done as soon as possible. The implementation of the first collateral measures of disarmament to be agreed on should make it possible to take a first step in response to the lofty appeal made by one of the most authoritative voices, to which we are all undoubtedly responsive.
60. It goes without saying that this proposal is not incompatible with others pursuing a similar aim. Mr. da Cunha, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil, and Mr. Thiam, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, after making a detailed analysis of the economic situation of the developing countries, reminded us last Thursday [1334th meeting] of certain recommendations addressed to the industrialized countries by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Italy reaffirm its intention to follow the road indicated in these recommendations.
61. The present situation requires a redoubling of efforts. There is no lack of signposts to show the way. Specific and detailed studies have already been made by the Organization. Now we must act. The United Nations Development Decade, in which 1965 is the half-way mark, must close with the success we all desire. If production is expanded, the marketing and trading system is improved and the efforts of all are concerted, an international society should rise from more solid and more just foundations, in which all peoples will be able to enjoy well-being in harmony.
62. Italy firmly intends to co-operate constructively in this policy and it is in this spirit that financial assistance to the developing countries was recently included by the Italian Government in the five-year programme for the Italian economy for 1966 to 1970. Already in the past our economic aid to these countries represented a considerable effort for our economy: expenditure on this item in the period 1956 to 1964 amounted to an average of $238 million a year.
63. In addition, foreign trade statistics show clearly that Italy is one of the industrialized countries whose imports from the developing countries, considered as a whole, considerably exceed its exports to those countries, thus helping the latter to dispose of their excess production.
64. It was in this spirit of co-operation to which I have referred that the Italian Government was glad to see the institutional machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development go into operation in the last few months and it is convinced that the expansion of international trade can provide a valid answer to a number of the most important problems posed by economic development. When the secretariat of the Conference has started work and the General Assembly has made the final choice of a headquarters for the secretariat — which has been invited to Italy should Switzerland no longer be in the running for it — it will be easier to make a more detailed examination of the problems involved.
65. In the same spirit, Italy is following with interest the intensification of the activities and programmes of the Centre for Industrial Development; in addition, the International Centre for Vocational and Technical Training is about to open at Turin and will train thousands of young people from developing countries in Africa, Latin America and Asia.
66. The eyes of our peoples are fixed on the United Nations, trying to see what we shall be able to do to satisfy the need for peace and security which is shared by all mankind. We have eloquent proof of this expectation in the pilgrimage which Pope Paul VI will make from Rome to our Assembly in eight days' time, in order to encourage us in the face of difficulties and to spur us on to action.
67. By responding to this appeal and helping to strengthen peace in justice and freedom, the United Nations will show that, following its ideals, it is striving to guarantee to all peoples the free and peaceful progress which is the most important purpose for which the Organization was created.
