43. Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of Japan, may I express to you our warm congratulations on your election as President of the twentieth session of the General Assembly. I am confident that, with your wisdom and wealth of experience in the field of international diplomacy, you will successfully lead us to many significant accomplishments during this important session.
44. I wish also at this time to express our profound thanks and appreciation to our former President, Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey, the Foreign Minister of Ghana. Elected President of the nineteenth session at a moment of great crisis in the United Nations, Mr. Quaison-Sackey fulfilled his heavy responsibilities with great tact and efficiency. It is In large measure due to his devoted efforts that we have been able to make substantial progress towards a solution of the problems that have beset us.
45. I wish also to take this opportunity to pay tribute to U Thant, Secretary-General of the United Nations, who has demonstrated rare qualities of leadership and ability to enhance the prestige of his office and, through it, of the United Nations. He has achieved many laudable things during the most difficult days of our Organization, and we have high hopes for his future achievements, especially during this period when the peace of Asia is so greatly disturbed.
46. It gives me great pleasure to welcome the Gambia, Singapore and the Maldive Islands to our midst and I wish to offer our warm congratulations to the delegations of these countries. We look forward to working closely with them in our common task of maintaining world peace in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
47. The United Nations is the world's temple of peace, created in the terrible ravages of war, and its foundation is the desire of mankind to seek justice and peace. As this twentieth session of the General Assembly gets under way, we must renew our determination to safeguard this world Organization from whatever storms and tempests might strike it in the future.
48. The nineteenth session of the General Assembly, deadlocked by conflicting positions on the applicability of Article 19 of the Charter, and prevented from discussing a number of important problems, was a disappointing session. It has also been a matter of grave concern to us that, since last year, certain States have been levelling unwarranted criticisms against this Organization. Yet the deadlock of the General Assembly did not altogether paralyse the functions and activities of the various other organs of the United Nations. On the contrary, these organs have been well able to carry on their proper functions. With regard to the criticism of the United Nations, which I just mentioned, we should note that only a handful of States are indulging in this activity and that their charges are clearly unjustified and unjustifiable.
49. I believe that all Member States continue to place their utmost confidence and hope in the United Nations. How, let us ask ourselves, would it have been possible to resolve the conflict over the question of the applicability of Article 19 of the Charter and to restore the General Assembly to normalcy in spite of differences in the basic positions of various parties, had it not been for such confidence and hope? How would it have been possible for the amendments to the Charter on enlargement of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council to enter into effect within such a short time, with ratification by so great a number of Member States?
50. My Government, inspired by feelings of confidence and hope in the United Nations, as manifested by the peoples of all Member States, including my own, has renewed its determination to exert its utmost efforts towards maintaining this Organization and further strengthening its functions. Now that the longstanding, legitimate aspirations of the Afro-Asian countries for enlargement of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council have been fulfilled, we are fully aware that a greater responsibility devolves upon us, the countries of Africa and Asia. Bearing this in mind, we are determined to spare no effort in furthering co-operation towards achieving the objectives of the United Nations.
51. With regard to the pressing financial situation of the United Nations, the Member States have agreed to solve the present difficulties by means of voluntary contributions of all the Member States. Behind this agreement there exists, I believe, a strong awareness among the Members that this Organization is vested with the highest authority to deal with the problems of international peace and security, and that it must not, therefore, be left in a situation where it is unable adequately to carry out its functions. I am convinced that these financial difficulties of the Organization should be solved through the co-operative efforts of the entire membership. On such conviction and as an evidence of the desire to strengthen the United Nations, Japan is prepared to make a voluntary contribution towards helping to relieve the financial difficulties of the United Nations in the amount which it deems would be an appropriate and equitable share of the responsibilities.
52. Since last year, we have been discussing the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations, and running through all of our discussions there are indications of the existence, among almost all the Member States of a common appreciation of the role played by the United Nations in times of grave world crisis and various local disputes. These Members remain profoundly hopeful that the Organization will continue to fulfil this vital function for the purpose of maintaining world peace in the future and they are quite determined to make further devoted efforts in that direction. Such determination and such efforts by every Member State constitute the very motivating power that opens up the way toward a brighter future for the United Nations. In this belief, Japan is willing and prepared to further its co-operation with and try to make greater contributions to the United Nations peace-keeping operation in as many aspects as possible.
53. The United Nations, having celebrated the twentieth anniversary of its birth, is entering a new stage. Being thus at an important moment in its history. 1 think it is very useful to discuss the future of this Organization. One of the most important tasks assigned to us is to enable the United Nations to carry on effective peace-keeping operation on a healthy and solid financial basis. I would therefore like to touch upon these questions and express the basic views of my delegation.
54. It goes without saying that the Security Council is the organ primarily responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is regrettable, however, that on occasion, in the past, this principal organ of the United Nations, because of a lack of unanimity among its five permanent members, was unable to fulfil this responsibility. It is necessary at this time, therefore, when the strengthening of the peace-keeping functions of the Organization is one of the most urgent needs of the day, that the newly expanded Security Council should devote its most serious efforts to ensuring that it can carry out its duties.
55. If the Security Council fails in performing its responsibilities and we can do nothing but helplessly watch the development of a situation, then the United Nations can never fulfil its tasks as an Organization responsible for the maintenance of international peace.
56. In such circumstances in the past, peace-keeping operations were carried out by the General Assembly, and I believe that in the future, too, the General Assembly should discuss the matter immediately, in virtue of its functions and competence under the Charter, and offer such recommendations as it may deem appropriate.
57. In so far as concerns the financing of future peace-keeping operations, we consider that the principle of collective financial responsibility, as well as the General Assembly's competence in the matter of assessment of expenses should be maintained except in cases of voluntary contributions or special arrangements among the parties directly involved. Believing as I do that the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, established under General Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX), has done a great deal to overcome the difficulties prevailing in the Organization in the past few years and to make possible the return to normal conditions of the General Assembly, I think it advisable that the General Assembly at the present session should direct the Special Committee to continue to study the various questions touching on future peace-keeping operations, including the financial aspects of those questions, and to report to the General Assembly at the earliest possible opportunity.
58. I should like to suggest that further study be undertaken of the various ways and means for the peaceful settlement of disputes such as are closely related to the question of United Nations peacekeeping operations. As one of the methods for the pacific settlement of disputes, one might consider whether the United Nations should not have an effective and authoritative presence permanently stationed in every part of the world.
59. In the economic field, there already exist several regional economic commissions with permanent secretariats. They are playing a valuable role by providing regularly a detailed and accurate analysis of the economic situation of each geographical region and by facilitating contacts and relationships regarding economic matters between the United Nations and various regional groups. In the political field, however, we have nothing comparable so far, except a few temporary or ad hoc bodies.
60. I think, therefore, that in the vital field of peace-keeping the presence of our Organization in various parts of the world might be established through the stationing, for example, of representatives of the Secretary-General in various key centres. It would naturally be desirable if such representatives of the highest executive office of the Organization were posted permanently in the various geographical regions. If that were not feasible, roving institutions of some form or other might also serve the purpose. It goes without saying that the activities of such representatives or institutions to ensure the United Nations presence in the world would be limited to the extent of the authority conferred upon the Secretary-General by the Charter. It is conceivable, however, that certain peace-keeping activities, such as inquiry or fact-finding in a given situation or dispute, might be conferred upon such representatives or institutions by' request either of the Security Council or the General Assembly.
61. As a means of facilitating the composition and sending out of fact-finding missions or conciliation committees, I should like to draw the attention of my colleagues to the Panel for Inquiry and Conciliation created by General Assembly resolution 268D (III) of 28 April 1949. By this resolution, each Member State is invited to designate persons who are deemed to be well fitted to serve as members of such a panel, and who would be disposed to serve in that capacity, so that the Secretary-General might always have easy access to the list of such persons. It appears that this panel has thus far not been very well employed, but it would greatly contribute to the strengthening of the peace-keeping capacity of the United Nations if Member States were to try to make use of this panel, It would also be useful to make a thorough study of the reasons, if any, why this institution has not in the past been very active and to consider whether it might be improved.
62. When we review the world situation today, it is gratifying to observe that a certain amount of dialogue and mutual understanding, pointing toward the relaxation of tensions, is developing between the United States and the USSR, and that efforts for peaceful co-existence are gradually bearing positive fruits. To these efforts due credit should be given. However, as the threat of global war recedes, local disputes seem to arise in various parts of the world. Asia is now plagued by conflict — in Viet-Nam, over Kashmir and around Malaysia — and fighting still continues in that region. Priceless human lives and wealth so dearly needed for the building up of Asia are being dissipated in these conflicts—conflicts among brethren, among Asian countries themselves.
63. If all countries, in conformity with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, would resolve to settle their disputes by peaceful means and refrain in their relations from the threat or use of force, the peace of the world would be established.
64. Since Japan joined the United Nations, it has been our basic foreign policy to strengthen this Organization, pledging consistently our fullest support and co-operation. As an Asian Member, we are determined to do our utmost to contribute to the maintenance of peace in Asia and in the world. Japan's candidature for election, during this session of the General Assembly, to the seat of a non permanent member of the Security Council bespeaks our earnest desire to serve the cause of peace.
65. The conflict in Viet-Nam has become Increasingly serious during the past year. My Government seeks a peaceful settlement of this conflict. Undoubtedly, the situation is highly complex. We are fully aware that there are great difficulties in the way of a peaceful solution, for there are great gaps between the parties involved and heavy fighting is going on between them. But peaceful solutions have to be found, no matter how difficult the task, and it is our earnest hope that the problem will be solved through discussions in the interest of peace in Asia and the lessening of tension in the world.
66. However, neither the call by the non-aligned nations for negotiations without any pre-conditions, nor the United States proposal for unconditional discussions, nor the proposal for the dispatch of a British Commonwealth mission, has met a favourable response from North Viet-Nam.
67. At this point, let me briefly recount the position taken by both parties on the conditions for peace. The United States is not opposed to discussing the four conditions put forward by North Viet-Nam, nor is it opposed to the Viet-Namese people's deciding their own future through free elections. The United States has also made clear its intention of ultimately withdrawing its forces now engaged in assisting in the defence of South Viet-Nam. North Viet-Nam, on the other hand, has not shown any desire to come forward to talk, but on the contrary seems to be bent on demanding the immediate withdrawal of United States forces, believing that it can win the war in Viet-Nam and unilaterally force its conditions upon others.
68. I believe that if the Communist side changes its attitude and, in a spirit of compromise, responds to the proposals for entering into unconditional discussions there will emerge a good opportunity to restore peace in Viet-Nam. In this connexion, I strongly urge all parties concerned to commit themselves to a policy of resolving the conflict through discussion and to enter into discussions with minimum delay in order to attain a peaceful solution of the conflict. At the same time, I call upon all States Members of the United Nations to assist and cooperate towards achieving this objective.
69. Today the call for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Viet-Nam is heard all over the world. My delegation wishes earnestly and hopefully that the present session will exert its influence towards the early solution of the Viet-Namese conflict. Japan, for its part, will spare no effort towards this end.
70. The recent outbreak of a major armed conflict between India and Pakistan over the question, of Kashmir was a matter of deep regret to us. Having friendly relations with both countries and being ourselves an Asian nation, Japan was agonized by the development and our Prime Minister, Mr. Sato, lost no time in appealing to the leaders of the two countries to cease fighting without delay.
71. It was most fortunate that the leaders of India and Pakistan listened to the world's opinion as reflected in the resolutions of the Security Council and with wisdom and courage reached a statesmanlike decision to adhere to the appeal for a cease-fire.
72. I wish, at this time, to pay my deep respect not only to the leaders of India and Pakistan, but also to the Security Council and to the Secretary-General for their unceasing and dedicated efforts to halt the hostilities. Such efforts as these contribute greatly to enhancing the prestige and function of the United Nations, in whose hands rests the responsibility for the maintenance of international peace.
73. However, it is a matter of deep regret that, according to the reports of the Secretary-General on the observance of the cease-fire, the situation in the troubled area is showing signs of deterioration and the cease-fire has not as yet been fully carried out.
74. The dispute between India and Pakistan has a long and complicated history, and each country may have its own reasons for the position which it is taking. But however that may be, I appeal to them both to co-operate, with courage and in good faith, by carrying-out the cease-fire, and implementing the resolutions recently adopted by the Security Council. I also ask them to make a just appraisal of the efforts which the United Nations has made in their dispute in the past and to make every possible effort towards a final and peaceful settlement in co-operation with this Organization. With full appreciation of the delicate nature of the situation still existing, all States should strictly refrain from any act which in any way might aggravate it.
75. As to the dispute between Indonesia and Malaysia, there seems as yet no early prospect of a peaceful settlement. We view with regret the withdrawal of Indonesia from the United Nations early this year. During the past year, we have on various occasions extended every possible indirect assistance to find a peaceful solution of the issue between Indonesia and Malaysia, both of which are our friendly neighbours. While we hope that the countries concerned will exert their best efforts for a peaceful settlement, our Government stands ready to continue its cooperation and will spare no effort to find a just and equitable solution of the problem.
76. As I said at the nineteenth session [1290th meeting], there is no doubt that the question of China occupies a very important place in the consideration of the Asian situation. Japan, having close geographical, historical and cultural ties with China, must always be deeply concerned with the development of the China question.
77. It is because we believe that this question is one of great complexity and has far-reaching implications in the context of peace in Asia, that Japan has hitherto asserted and again asserts that it requires very careful deliberation, based on a realistic and balanced appraisal of all the factors involved. In view of the fact that the question of Chinese representation is an important one which touches the very core of the China question, I wish again to urge the General Assembly to maintain the same prudent attitude that it has taken at previous sessions in dealing with this question.
78. An indispensable requisite for the realization of lasting peace and prosperity in the world is that the developing countries be helped to overcome their economic stagnation and promote their development. The solution of the so-called "North-South problem" is thus among our most important tasks from the standpoint of strengthening the fabric of world peace.
79. It is gratifying that the United Nations, by designating the 1960's as the United Nations Development Decade, decided to enlist the co-operation of all Member States towards the solution of the problem of a world-wide scale, and that various measures have already been put into effect in such areas as industrial development and international trade. In particular, a good and encouraging sign in this respect is the fact that various organs of the Conference on Trade and Development, established by resolution 1995 (XIX) of the General Assembly last year, have begun operating in a steady manner. As we are now entering the last half of the United Nations Development Decade, Japan earnestly hopes and is confident that the United Nations, being regarded always as the centre of concerted action, not only by the various organs associated with it but also by the Member States, will continue to play a positive role towards the attainment of its objectives.
80. As a nation which for nearly a century has trodden the thorny path of economic development, Japan cannot but have full and sympathetic regard for the aspirations of the developing countries and the various difficulties which confront them. We shall not spare any effort within our power to cooperate with the developing countries in helping them to expand and diversify their exports. Japan is taking fully into consideration the international demand for increased foreign aid, as evidenced at the first meeting of the Conference on Trade and Development, and is determined to continue to intensify its efforts with 1 per cent of our national income as an aid target. It is along these lines that we hope and intend to play a constructive role in pursuing the objectives of the Development Decade.
81. I should like to say a word or two in particular about the economic development of Asia. We greatly appreciate and highly commend the achievements of the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East. The scheme for the establishment of an Asian Development Bank, which has been actively promoted by the Commission, is an outstanding example. Japan has lent active co-operation to this project from the very start and intends to make a contribution amounting to $200 million to the capital of this bank. As an Asian nation, Japan sincerely hopes and expects that the day will soon come when the Asian Development Bank will start its operations, thus making a valuable contribution towards the promotion of economic co-operation among Asian countries.
82. I should now like to touch upon the question of disarmament, a subject of deepest concern to everyone in our contemporary world.
83. In April this year, the United Nations Disarmament Commission convened at the initiative of the USSR, after lying dormant for five years, and came up with recommendations which led to the resumption of the meeting's of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee at Geneva after nearly a year's recess. This is a welcome and gratifying development.
84. As has been pointed out by the Disarmament Commission, the world's most urgent task is to achieve a comprehensive nuclear test ban and the prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons. Coming at such a time, the second nuclear explosion by the People's Republic of China in its territory, in May, for the purpose of nuclear weapons development was a most regrettable occurrence. The leaders of that country would have had us believe by their statements at the time that the explosion was a great step forward towards the maintenance of international peace and security. On the contrary, one is constrained to say that such test explosions, carried out at the very moment when the world has been exerting all its possible efforts to achieve the total banning of nuclear tests and the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, cannot contribute in the least to the maintenance of the peace and security of the world. It is my earnest desire that the People's Republic of China, and France as well, will respond positively to the aspirations of the world's millions by adhering immediately to the partial test-ban Treaty.
85. The prohibition of nuclear weapons tests and the prevention of the proliferation of such weapons serve in common the purpose of restricting the development of the nuclear capabilities of States. When we take into account that any non-nuclear Power would have to conduct nuclear explosions to develop its own nuclear arsenal, the total prohibition of nuclear weapons tests would be one of tire most effective means of achieving non-proliferation.
86. We are aware that the question of inspection and verification of underground tests constitutes, at present, a major obstacle to the conclusion by the nuclear Powers of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. It is said in this connexion that recent scientific developments in this field would make it possible to reduce the number of on-site inspections to a minimum. We sincerely hope that the nuclear Powers, by composing the remaining differences between their respective positions, may be able to agree promptly on the terms of a total test-ban treaty. It seems most desirable, in this connexion, that the nuclear Powers, and the non-nuclear Powers as well, which have a substantial amount of seismographic knowledge, should undertake a study of the development of methods of detection and inspection of underground testing. If such a study is undertaken, my country is prepared to co-operate fully with other countries.
87. Turning now to the question of preventing the spread of nuclear weapons, we note that a draft treaty on preventing nuclear proliferation submitted by the United States and a proposal on a unilateral declaration of non-acquisition of nuclear weapons made by Italy — and this on your initiative, Mr. President — at the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee have paved the way for a solution of this question, The proposals deserve serious study and we highly appreciate the efforts of these countries. It is the view of the Japanese Government that, when we aim at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons, we must at the same time take fully into account the security of each nation, and the nuclear and nonnuclear Powers should all equally share the sacrifices. Confronted with such a grave problem as this, self-restraint by countries with a potential nuclear weapons capability is most desirable, but we should, at the same time, listen to their voices with great respect and careful attention. Moreover, utmost efforts should be made to enable all nuclear Powers and non-nuclear Powers with nuclear potential to adhere to a treaty to be concluded on this subject.
88. The General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA], which has just concluded its ninth regular session in Tokyo, aims at, as one of its objectives, the wide application of international safeguards against the diversion of atomic energy from peaceful to military uses. In Japan, research and development in the field of atomic energy is confined by law to peaceful purposes only, and my Government has co-operated positively in the application of international safeguards. It is my earnest hope that all other countries that have not yet done so will likewise accept and adhere to some form of international safeguards.
89. As regards the question of convening a world disarmament conference, which is on the agenda of this session, the delegation of Japan supports, in principle, the convening of such a conference. However, if it is to achieve positive results, it is quite evident that we need the most careful examination of various aspects of the problem and adequate preparatory work. I therefore urge that all of us should, at this session, give deliberate and detailed consideration to this subject, including such points as categories of countries to be invited, the date when such a conference should be convened, and the agenda items to which special priority should be given.
90. Having attempted to explain the basic positions and desires of the Japanese delegation regarding various important questions which now confront the United Nations, with special reference to those concerning United Nations peace-keeping operations, the situation in Asia, the problem of economic development, disarmament and so forth, I should now like to conclude with a few general observations.
91. Given the current drift of the world towards multi-polarization, the United Nations is, I believe, the only effective Organization that can unite the world. In the present-day world, in which a trip to the moon is no longer a romantic dream, all of us must rise above differences of nationality, race, language, and religion. We must unite and exert our utmost efforts in the cause of peace and for the prosperity and welfare of all mankind. The United Nations may have to go through many tests before it becomes a really effective Organization, competent to realize fully the lofty ideals of mankind set forth in the Charter. It is incumbent upon even Member State to support and help the United Nations in order to make it the Organization it was intended to be; it is more necessary than ever that every Member State should co-operate and endeavour to strengthen the United Nations.
92. Mr. President, I hope and trust that this Assembly under your leadership, will accomplish many fruitful results, and that it will contribute further to the strengthening of the United Nations, as well as to the peace, security and prosperity of the world. To that end my delegation pledges its diligent effort and cooperation.