17. We were very sorry to learn that Mr. Fanfani, the President of the General Assembly is incapacitated. I would ask you, Mr. Vice-President, to be kind enough to convey to him my delegation's best wishes for a speedy recovery and our hope that we shall soon see him back here, fully restored to health, directing the General Assembly.
18. At the same time, I would ask you to convey to Mr. Fanfani my delegation's warm congratulations of his election to the office of President of the United Nations General Assembly. The unanimous vote which he received reflects the affection and esteem in which he is held not only in his own country but throughout the world. His constructive work in the most varied fields has given him international stature as a statesman. His efforts to strengthen his country's relations with all other peace-loving countries, including Libya, with which Italy has always had friendly relations, have added lustre to his renown and prestige.
19. I take this opportunity also to pay a tribute to Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey, President of the General Assembly at its nineteenth session, who, through his wisdom and determined efforts, was able to overcome the problems of a particularly difficult session.
20. I should also like to pay a warm tribute to U Thant, our Secretary-General, for his devoted efforts to bring peace to the various troubled regions of the world. In his difficult and sometimes arduous task, he never fails to comport himself as a zealous servant of the aims and ideal of the United Nations.
21. My delegation welcomes the three new States — the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore — which have been admitted as Members of the United Nations. The admission of these three new Members is one more step towards making the United Nations universal. We wish them prosperity in their new life as independent nations.
22. The world is confronted with serious problems threatening its peace and security, but the efforts of the United Nations, backed by world public opinion, have succeeded in reducing tension and bringing about the necessary atmosphere for seeking a peaceful solution to these problems.
23. The recent events which the United Nations has experienced, such as the crisis of the nineteenth session which brought United Nations activities almost to a standstill, the international crisis which has spread to several parts of the world and the use of force for the settlement of international disputes, have shown without the shadow of a doubt the serious repercussions of these problems on the future of the United Nations, and above all on world peace and security.
24. Today more than ever we feel that the existence of the United Nations is essential for the good of mankind and we must give it all the means it requires to establish and maintain universal peace and to settle international disputes by peaceful means, with due regard for the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, respect for the sovereignty of States and the right to self-determination. We realize that the United Nations will not be able to discharge that heavy responsibility in full without the support of all nations, great and small.
25. It has been a source of great satisfaction to see the normal resumption of work at the twentieth session after the serious crisis which the United Nations underwent at its nineteenth session and which left much bitterness in its wake. I should like to pay a tribute to the spirit of understanding and co-operation which has prevailed, enabling us to overcome all difficulties and paving the way for a solution of the financial crisis thanks to the efforts of all parties. My delegation hopes that that harsh ordeal will encourage the General Assembly to eliminate the causes of the crisis and to find the best solution to the problem of organizing and financing United Nations peace-keeping forces.
26. At our previous sessions, the General Assembly has always had to deal with problems of vital importance. At the present session, however, it is confronted with even more serious problems affecting the peace and security of the world. There is the war in Viet-Nam, the problem of Cyprus, and the armed conflict between India and Pakistan over the still unsettled question of Kashmir.
27. All these new problems have added to the Secretary-General’s responsibilities and make it imperative for the United Nations to do everything in its power to put an end to these armed conflicts or threats of the use of force in these regions. The untiring efforts of the Secretary-General have earned him the gratitude and appreciation of all the Members of the United Nations for the determination with which he carried out his difficult task.
28. We hope that the hard-won cease-fire between India and Pakistan will be transformed into a final and just settlement of the question, in accordance with the wishes of the peoples of the disputed territories and the principles of the Charter.
29. I am sure, Mr. Vice-President, that you will agree with me that the deterioration of the threatening situation in Viet-Nam, which the whole world is following closely, creates a danger to peace and that the constant risk that it will spread affects us all. The Government of Libya therefore appeals for the mobilization of all efforts to persuade the parties engaged in the conflict to stop fighting and to open negotiations with a view to a peaceful settlement. My delegation considers that the 1954 Geneva Agreements can still be of use in the search for a solution.
30. The situation in Cyprus endangers peace and security in that very important part of the world. Efforts to reconcile the opposing points of view must be intensified and negotiations must be started to find a peaceful solution which is satisfactory to the two communities living on the island and will enable them to live together peacefully.
31. The question of disarmament is always regarded as the most important question which the United Nations has had to tackle since its creation. Thisquestion is again on our agenda at the twentieth session, at a time when events in various parts of the world are plunging all mankind into fear and anguish. The arms race is being gradually stepped up and anxiety is beginning to replace the hopes kindled in us by the resolutions of the eighteenth session.
32. At a time when mankind was expecting a complete agreement on the total prohibition of nuclear tests in space, under water and under ground, the prevention of a wider dissemination of nuclear weapons and a halt to the arms race, and was hoping at last to reach a new stage on the difficult path to disarmament, we are faced, on the contrary, with an increase in the number of States possessing nuclear weapons or preparing to possess them. If the idea that only the possession of nuclear weapons can guarantee the security of countries becomes generally accepted, we shall be on the brink of disaster.33. The security of the world and the future of mankind compel us to face this painful reality and to seek an agreement for the prohibition of all nuclear tests, including underground tests, with the participation of all States, without any distinction. Stronger measures must also be taken to prevent the dissemination of nuclear weapons and to put an end to the arms race.
34. The Libyan delegation considers that the implementation of the recommendations of the Disarmament Commission for a world disarmament conference, to which all countries would be invited, would be a positive step towards the goal of general disarmament under effective international control for which we all long. We shall support any proposal designed to achieve this goal. The future of the human race obviously depends to some extent on the achievement of general and complete disarmament. Such an achievement would enable mankind to harness atomic energy for peaceful purposes and to use the resources hitherto devoted to the arms race for the economic and social development of the developing countries.
35. Libya appreciates the efforts of the United Nations in seeking solution to international problems and disputes. It finds it hard, however, to understand why the Organization has so far failed to find a solution to a problem that is as serious as those I have already mentioned: I am referring to the problem of Arab Palestine. This question appears on the agenda of every session and each year we discuss this tragedy which is without precedent in the history of mankind. Ah entire people, driven from its land, is living the life of refugees on international charity while the aggressor enjoys that people's property and wealth.
36. The problem of Palestine is really a unique tragedy. It has been on the agenda of several successive sessions as a refugee problem. It is really the problem of a people which demands the liberation of its homeland and the right to self-determination, in common with all the peoples of the world and in accordance with the principles of the United Nations and the spirit of the Charter.
37. World Zionism has always resorted to intrigue to obscure the basic elements of the Palestine question. This devious approach has been conceived to mislead world public opinion and to present the matter as a refugee problem. But the Arab people of Palestine, despite the cruel conditions in which they have been living for seventeen years, have never lost hope of regaining their homeland and seeing the conscience of the world prevail in favour of the principles of justice and equity. They have succeeded in establishing themselves as an entity and have organized themselves into a legal body which speaks on their behalf and defends their rights; that body is the Palestine Liberation Organization.
38. In spite of all the attempts that have been made for seventeen long years to distort law and history, the question of Palestine has become established in the international field as a problem of liberation. The Arab cause received the full support of the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which took place at Cairo in 1964 and in which almost half the Member States of this Organization participated. That Conference adopted a historic resolution affirming the right of the Arab people of Palestine to recover their homeland and to achieve self-determination.
39. United Nations documents can show the manner in which the Arab Palestine was invaded and the means which were used to expel its population. The recent events at Ramleh and the atrocities committed against the Arab minority still living in occupied territory testify to the depth of this tragedy.
40. In this Assembly we have heard the so-called peaceful statements of the representative of Israel. For seventeen long years the Middle. East has been a troubled area, ever since the State of Israel was created there, ever since the Palestine Arabs were driven from the land of their ancestors, massacred and stripped of their wealth.

41. If Israel considers itself compelled to remain on a war footing, enrolling women and children to guard its illegal conquests and to defy the resolutions of the United Nations, the responsibility lies with its leaders and their accomplices and not with the victims who are ceaselessly seeking redress for the injury done to them.
42. If we really wish to seek peace, as the Supreme Pontiff wisely advised us to do in his message to the Assembly [1347th meeting], under pain of seeing mankind brought to an end, we must admit that peace is indivisible and that it will not be universal as long as the Palestine Arabs have not recovered the rights and the land of their ancestors.
43. The active role of the United Nations in the liquidation of colonialism has been substantial and most encouraging. We expect to see the complete disappearance of the frightful spectre of colonialism from the world. Unfortunately, there are still countries fighting against foreign domination in order to obtain freedom and independence.
44. The question of Oman, which has also been on the agenda of previous sessions, is still awaiting a final solution responding to the hopes and aspirations of the people of Oman, who are seeking freedom and an honourable life.
45. The happenings in Aden have become so grave that they are a matter of concern to all peoples who love peace and justice. It is the duty of our Organization to find a speedy answer to this new tragedy, in accordance with the aspirations of the peoples concerned and with the spirit of the Charter.46. We are glad to see that a large number of African peoples who have recently obtained freedom are now enjoying independence and taking an active part in joint efforts to build a better world. We regret to note, however, that there are other African countries that are still suffering from abuse and inhuman treatment. The people of South West Africa have fought for many years and are still fighting for their freedom. It is surprising that the United Nations resolutions asking for an end to this state of affairs should be flouted and ignored and that the exercise of their right to self-determination should be denied to this people.
47. The increasingly serious situation in Southern Rhodesia, which is the result of a ruthless policy of discrimination by the white minority government against the people of Southern Rhodesia, has shocked the world. The threat of this white minority Government against the people of Southern Rhodesia, has shocked the world. The threat of this white minority Government to declare independence and to impose a constitution which neither protects nor guarantees human rights is a direct violation of the fundamental principles of justice and equality. The Libyan Government will support any constructive action by the United Nations to safeguard the aspirations, hopes and rights of the people of Southern Rhodesia and help them obtain independence and freedom.
48. My Government is very concerned about the repressive measures enacted by the Portuguese Government against the people of Angola, Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea. The Portuguese Government has repeatedly flouted United Nations resolutions and has strengthened its policy of repression and terrorism. What the Government of Portugal does not understand is that this state of affairs will not break the will of these oppressed peoples or deter them in the struggle they continue to wage for the achievement of their national aspirations.
49. At a time when nations of different ethnic origins and stages of development are striving to improve their relations, to overthrow the barriers between them and to attain the objectives set forth in the Charter, the Government of South Africa is obstinately pursuing its policy of apartheid, which is repugnant to the conscience of mankind. The practice of this detestable and repressive racist policy is a violation of the basic principles which are necessary fur any human being aspiring to a decent and honourable life.
50. Human progress depends on the ability to overcome pernicious policies, which, if they were to spread, would sap human energy, obstruct development and retard progress towards that better world where equality, abundance and peace will reign.
51. Economic and trade relations between the nations of this world are improving and co-operation between developed and developing countries is increasing. Thanks to the untiring efforts of the developing countries, including Libya, under the auspices and with the support of the United Nations, the Conference on Trade and Development has been set up and has become an institution. The goal of the conference is to build a new economic system, creating better conditions and stability essential for securing a high standard of living in the developing countries by the advancement of studies, modern research and technology.
52. The interest of the United Nations in the field of economic development reflects an awareness of mutual responsibility between developed and developing countries. In order to enable the developing countries to secure a normal rate of economic growth — which they cannot do with their own limited resources — effective assistance for the attainment of this goal must be given to them by the industrially developed countries.
53. Finally, I wish to say that the Libyan Government, acting in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1907 (XVIII), which designated 1965 as International Co-operation Year, has worthily commemorated this memorable event. His Excellency the Prime Minister of Libya made a speech praising the work of the United Nations and affirming Libya’s support for this Organization. I shall quote the following paragraph from his speech:
"Libya is happy to join with all the nations of the world in celebrating this memorable event and in affirming its continuous support for the aims and objectives of the United Nations and its readiness to support any resolution and any action designed to achieve peace and security in the world."
54. It is an honour for me, Mr. Vice-President, to convey to you the best wishes of Libya, of His Majesty King Idris and of all the Libyan people, hoping that all your noble efforts will be crowned with success. We hope that our great Organization will continue to overcome the various difficulties it will have to face; thus peace and abundance will reign throughout the world.
