1. Mr. President, I wish to offer to you, on behalf of the Nigerian delegation, my warmest congratulations on your election to the Presidency of the twentieth session of the General Assembly. It is an honour for which you, Sir, and the country that you have continued to serve with such great distinction, should be justly proud. Your distinguished career and your immensely impressive personal record, both as Prime Minister and now as the Foreign Minister of your great country, inspire my delegation to the firm belief that the proceedings of this session of the General Assembly will be most ably and most wisely guided. Permit me also. Sir, to take this opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor in the Presidency, Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey, who, throughout the anxious and unusually difficult period of the nineteenth session of the General Assembly, displayed such determination, such capacity and such wise steadfastness as amply to justify the confidence of the African nations whose worthy son he is.
2. The Nigerian delegation has come to the twentieth session of the General Assembly with a great feeling of relief and full determination to put the best it can into the work which the nineteenth session found itself unable to do. Our sense of relief arises not only from the knowledge that the twentieth session can now proceed to operate normally, but also from our gratifying belief that this Organization, whose very existence appeared to have been gravely threatened by the disagreement that persisted during the nineteenth session, once again seems ready and willing to tackle the responsibilities in respect of which many people everywhere hopefully look up to it for solutions.
3. Before dealing with some of these responsibilities, I should like, if I may, to extend the welcome and congratulations of the Nigerian Government to the three new Members of the Organization. My country has had the most pleasant association with the Gambia, a sister African State, and with Singapore, with which we have always been associated in the Commonwealth of Nations. We eagerly look forward to the closest co-operation between the Nigerian delegation and the delegations of the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore, both within the Afro-Asian Group and within the United Nations as a whole.
4. The admission of the three new Members takes the Organization another step forward towards the attainment of the principles of universality, which my delegation believes can usefully add to the authority and influence of the United Nations. It is in this light that my Government must view with regret the absence of the People’s Republic of China from the United Nations. The question that we must ask ourselves is whether the United Nations has been, or is likely to be, a more effective organization as a result of the People's Republic of China being kept out of it. Nigeria does not think so. We do not think that a country whose people constitute about one-fifth of mankind and which, whether we approve it or not, now possesses atomic weapons, should be kept out of the mainstream and the deliberations of this world body. To continue to do so would, in the view of my delegation, mean to ignore the important fact that the task of achieving peace and stability in the world can be more easily and more fruitfully tackled if we can enlist the participation of all the big Powers in consideration thereof.
5. But we hope for a full solution to the Chinese question. The Peking-Formosa controversy is part of that question. The resolution of that controversy, however, rests primarily with the Chinese people themselves.

6. A look at the world situation during the past year unavoidably reveals that the quest for the maintenance of international peace must remain very high on the list of United Nations business. Our quest for peace, if it is to yield maximum results, must address itself not only to the settlement of disputes and conflicts that have already flared up, but also to the elimination of some of the situations from which disputes and conflicts inevitably develop.
7. You will therefore forgive me, Mr. President, if I proceed immediately to refer first to the events in Africa and their place in the over-all search for ways of maintaining international peace. For how meaningful can the search for world peace be to the citizens of Angola, Mozambique, Southern Rhodesia and those other parts of Africa that remain unhappy enclaves of colonialism, or in South Africa where the Government continues to pursue, with defiant impunity, a policy that carries with it one of the worst forms of repression and denial of fundamental human rights based on racism?
8. There are other unhappy situations, the existence of which my Government believes should cause great concern to the United Nations. For instance, the Organization's "unfinished business" in Cyprus. We must not forget that, there as elsewhere, a cease-fire is not a settlement. We must encourage the early resolution of the dispute there on the twin principles of self-determination and protection of the legitimate rights of minorities.

9. Can we forget, Mr. President, the tragedies of which you were reminding us when, in your inaugural speech you pointed out that, as we gathered here to open our session, "guns are booming in Asia. Houses are falling. Man are dying. More and more families are falling prey to despair" [1332nd meeting, para. 17]. In Viet-Nam, a conflict has been raging now for a considerable time, causing great misery to many a home. My country shares the distress of all peace-loving nations at this state of affairs. We do not consider that a just solution to the conflict can be produced by military means. We believe in the peaceful solution of conflicts. We think that a ceasefire should be arranged as soon as possible, followed by a conference at which the Viet-Namese people will be enabled to work out their own future. The fact that this dangerous conflict, with its grave possibilities for world peace, continues without the Security Council — our principal organ for the maintenance of peace — being able even to discuss it, is a sad commentary on the unhealthy state of our Organization.
10. Nigeria, in its dedication to encouraging the development of this Organization as an effective guardian of world peace, considers it essential that Member States should not turn their backs on tragedies and sufferings wherever they may be taking place and however intractable the problems they pose. In this connexion, we are grateful for the stupendous efforts made by the Security Council and our great and indefatigable Secretary-General in promoting the present cease-fire in the latest conflict between India and Pakistan. My Prime Minister expressed the tribute of the Nigerian people in respect of those efforts in, a message addressed to the Secretary-General which, with your permission, Sir, I would like to quote. Here it is:
"I send you and Security Council warmest congratulations on behalf of myself, the Government and people of Nigeria on achieving a cease-fire in Kashmir. Your remarkable success in bringing to an end conflict between India and Pakistan is a unique triumph of reason and. augurs well for the future of the United Nations and indeed of all mankind."
11. It is the hope of the Nigerian delegation, in spite of all the difficulties and irritations of the situation, that the cease-fire will be maintained and that it will open the way to a lasting settlement between India and Pakistan. Nigeria enjoys the most friendly relations with both of these countries. In reply to a request by the Secretary-General, my Government has agreed to contribute to the team of observers required to assist in the maintenance of the cease-fire. It was a great pleasure for it to do so.
12. But the United Nations must not allow itself to become simply an organization for the maintenance of cease-fires. The securing of a cease-fire must always be regarded as only the preliminary to further action. We are glad to note that in this particular case the Security Council is showing a courageous determination to take that further action. The Nigerian delegation wishes solemnly to appeal to the leaders of both India and Pakistan to co-operate with the Council in this endeavour.
13. The problem of assembling for the Indo-Pakistan cease-fire a supervisory force of adequate size in a short time underlines the importance of creating a permanent peace-keeping force which would be available for this kind of emergency without embarrassing delay. But the Indo-Pakistan case does more than that. It points up the inadequacy of our Organization's machinery for the peaceful settlement of disputes before they develop into wars. My delegation therefore welcomes the initiative which the United Kingdom has taken in introducing an item into our agenda on the peaceful settlement of disputes. This British initiative can be said to parallel in the political field similar activity in the economic field which has resulted in the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and nationals of other States, which came into effect a few months ago under the aegis of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
14. Nigeria was happy to be among the first to subscribe to that Convention, just as we were happy a few weeks ago to file with the Secretary-General our declaration of acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. As our Permanent Representative said on that occasion:

"The International Court of Justice represents one of the symbols of man's belief in a world of law and order, a world in which might ceases to be right, and truth and justice prevail. It has, however, remained little more than a symbol because too many States have refused to give the Court their trust and confidence. Nigeria is happy to join the band of those who are prepared to do so.
"We are not doing this because we think that everything is right with the Court, or with the state of international law itself. We are doing it because we believe that the proper course for all peace-loving countries is to demonstrate their belief in an ordered world by accepting the jurisdiction of the Court and then co-operating to secure the removal of those features that handicap its effective and world-wide co-operation.
"I wish to emphasize that Nigeria's acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court is without the sort of reservations which make certain acceptances of limited value. Our acceptance is subject only to the one condition of reciprocity."
15. But we have to face the fact that, for so long as one can foresee, there will be cases in which supervisory forces, or police forces, or even military forces, will require to be employed by the United Nations for purposes of peace-keeping. The United Nations has been in financial difficulties arising from such peace-keeping operations. We cannot afford to let this Organization become atrophied in that essential area. That would be disastrous. We therefore appeal to those Members which have not done so to contribute to the "rescue fund" as an earnest of their belief in this Organization. Nigeria has, happily, paid its own contribution. It is of course our hope that, as a result of further exertions on the part of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, the United Nations will evolve a permanent machinery for future peace-keeping operations, with assured sources of finance.
16. Nigeria continues to attach great importance to the question of achieving a general and complete disarmament of the world. We have continued to participate fully in the work of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee. We feel constrained, however, to express our disappointment at the slow progress being made in the Geneva talks. We are disappointed that the auspicious start which was made with the Moscow Treaty of August 1963 has not been followed through.
17. There is today neither a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty nor a guarantee against the proliferation of nuclear weapons — two measures without which the dangerous arms race with its senseless misuse of human resources is, bound to continue. Nigeria wishes to add its voice to the appeal for speedy agreement on this vital subject. It was for this same reason that the Nigerian delegation to the last session of the Disarmament Commission gave its support to the idea of convening a world conference to discuss disarmament, an idea that we hope will be followed up with action in the near future.
18. We have witnessed in recent months events that had added a considerable degree of urgency to the need to find an agreement to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. To delay much longer the reaching of such an agreement will only make it more difficult for all the countries which now possess the capacity to develop nuclear arms to continue to refrain from doing so in the face of threats, immediate or potential, to their own security. We believe that the quest for agreement of non-proliferation of nuclear arms will be greatly helped by an agreement whereby the existing nuclear Powers will undertake to bar the threat or the use of nuclear arms against non-nuclear Powers.
19. The African group, of which Nigeria is a member, has submitted a request for the denuclearization of Africa [see A/5975]. We also note with pleasure that the Latin American countries are considering a similar proposal in relation to Latin America. The Nigerian delegation fully supports the policy of the denuclearization of certain areas of the world, as a step towards eventual denuclearization of the whole. We hope that the African group’s proposal will receive the support of all Members.
20. My delegation supports a continuation of the current negotiations on disarmament and Nigeria will continue to contribute all it can, both in Geneva and here in New York, to the United Nations efforts to achieve further agreement on collateral measures and on specific measures for reducing the arms race, and to work towards the attainment of a completely disarmed world.

21. I feel obliged to refer in greater detail to the grave danger which the apartheid policies of the Government of the Republic of South Africa pose to the peace and security of the African continent and of the world at large. Nigeria, along with all other independent African States, has continued to urge the Members of the United Nations to take positive action in order to put out a flame, the embers of which, if not checked, will inevitably engulf Africa and the rest of the world in unspeakable tragedy. Yes, unspeakable tragedy, because what is in prospect is not a clash along ideological, religious or such other lines, but a conflict waged on the basis of race and colour. The Nigerian people, the African peoples, people of African descent everywhere, must surely feel gravely concerned about the continued existence in Africa of a system that condemns men, women and children of the non-white race to a position of virtual slavery and unending persecution in their own country. All those who care to give substance to their professions of love and justice, freedom and respect for fundamental human rights, must surely recognize that there is no testing ground more apt for the demonstration of their dedication to these principles than in South Africa where a white minority Government continues to oppress and persecute the majority non-white population.
22. As has been stated from this rostrum a number of times in the past, Nigeria believes that the only acceptable solution to the explosive situation in the Republic of South Africa is the complete elimination of the policy of apartheid and the emergence of a South Africa in which fundamental human rights and equality of liberties are assured for all its citizens irrespective of race and colour.
23. Permit me also, Mr. President, to draw attention to the sad situation in Southern Rhodesia. In the view of the Nigerian delegation. Southern Rhodesia is the most urgent and serious problem confronting Africa today. In this British colony, not only do we see the continued denial of all political rights to the 4 million Africans by a Government composed of a white minority of about a quarter of a million; that Government is at this moment threatening to make a unilateral declaration of independence. Such a declaration would pose a very dangerous threat to world peace and security. The British Government has asserted its intention to apply economic sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in the event of a unilateral declaration of independence. Nigeria does not think that this is enough. The British Government must live up to its full responsibility in this matter, including the responsibility to apply as much force — especially military force — as may be warranted by the situation.
24. My delegation also hopes that the General Assembly will come up with a resolution that makes it clear, that in unilaterally proclaiming independence, Mr. Smith will be defying not only the British Government but all the States Members of the United Nations — a resolution that also leaves him in no doubt as to the consequences, to him and his fellow-racists, of that precipitate act.
25. In Angola, Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea, Africans are today engaged in genuine wars of national liberation. In spite of internal as well as external handicaps, they will overcome; they are bound to overcome, for their cause is just. Nigeria will support them to the end.
26. In the search for peace and greater international understanding, it is not only in the political sphere that this Organization should increase its efforts. The economic situation continues to worsen for developing countries. The gap between the "haves" and the "haves nots" continues to widen. The increased prosperity of the industrialized countries contrasts sharply with the increased misery of the developing countries. The prices of manufactured goods rise all the time; those of the major agricultural commodities traded by developing countries fall all the time; The General Assembly, in passing the Development Decade resolution in 1961 [1710 (XVI)], pronounced itself categorically in favour of lessening the miseries and improving the well-being of developing countries It is therefore a matter for great regret that the Secretary-General’s interim report to the 39th session of the Economic and Social Council had to indicate that, "the progress thus far achieved towards the objectives of the Decade is less impressive than the fact that these objectives, although not very ambitious, remain quite distant"

27. Nigeria was glad to see the adoption of resolution 1995 (XIX) establishing the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as an organ of the Organization. But there is need for the political will to assist the organ in realizing its mandate. We therefore appeal to Member States, and in particular to the developed countries, to give their fullest support and co-operation to the Conference and its subsidiary bodies in their efforts to implement the recommendations adopted at the first United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in 1964.
28. The activities of the United Nations in the field of industrial development deserves particular attention. In the past these activities have fallen below the level generally desired by the members of this Assembly. That is why Nigeria has always supported the creation of a specialized agency for industrial development within the United Nations family; such an agency would give the necessary impetus to this essential activity. My delegation hopes that the twentieth session will reach a positive decision on this important subject. In this connexion, we welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General in providing additional staff for the Centre for Industrial Development in the 1966 budget estimate. We regard this as an interim measure, since the ultimate objective, in our view, is the creation of a specialized agency for industrial development.

29. Yesterday [1347th meeting], this Assembly had the privilege, for the first time in its twenty years of existence, to receive the head of the Roman Catholic Church. The impact of His Holiness Pope Paul’s message on us had nothing to do with whether we were Roman Catholics, or Protestant Christians, or Moslems, or people of no religion at all. I nearly said "people of no faith at all", but that would not be correct, for we all share one faith with the great Pontiff: namely, faith in humanity.
30. The Pope's message made a profound impression on the Nigerian delegation. I am sure the effect will be the same on my Government and the people of Nigeria, because we believe in the kind of world that he wishes us all to join in creating: a world in which we can live together in peace, regardless of differences of race, creed and ideology. It is the kind of world that we ourselves are trying hard to fashion within Nigeria, a country with a multitude of different ethnic groups speaking over two hundred different languages, and worshipping God in several different ways.

31. We are glad and grateful that Pope Paul is so devoutly dedicated to the pursuit of the grand initiative taken by his great predecessor in office in his memorable Pacem in Terris. Pope John broke with his Church's tradition in a number of ways. In coming to New York to address us, Pope Paul was also breaking with tradition, for no head of his Church had done that before. If the world is to be saved from destroying itself, we must all be ready to break with tradition: with traditions of pugnacity and of "my country, right or wrong". We must recognize that no country, great of small, knows all the answers or has the right, in the name of principle or ideology, to insist that others must accept its views. Nigeria believes in the sovereignty of all nations, but Nigeria also believes in the interdependence of sovereign nations.
