6.     I should like, first of all, to join previous speakers in extending my delegation's hearty congratulations to Mr. Fanfani on his election as President of the General Assembly at its twentieth session. It is with great regret that the Rwandese delegation and I have learned of the accident suffered by the President of the General Assembly. We would ask you. Sir, to be good enough to convey to him our best wishes for a speedy recovery and return among us.

7.    I should also like to take this opportunity to express the satisfaction of the Government and people of Rwanda at the admission to the United Nations of three new Member States belonging to the Afro-Asian family — the Gambia, Singapore and the Maldive Islands. We bid them welcome and believe that their admission, which is an important advance in the achievement of our Organization's aims will enable us to tackle with new determination the serious problems facing the world today.

8.    The twentieth session opens in an atmosphere of optimism and hope. The Rwandese delegation, like those which have preceded it on this rostrum, cannot but express its gratitude for the tireless efforts made by the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations. It would also like to take this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the President of the nineteenth session, Mr. Quaison-Sackey, Minister for Foreign. Affairs of Ghana, and to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, U Thant, whose efforts have been particularly important in enabling the members of the Special Committee to carry out with great success the important task entrusted to them by the General Assembly, Thanks to them and to the goodwill shown by all Member States, the Assembly is now in a position to proceed with its work normally.

9.    Since my delegation did not have the honour of participating in the work of the Committee of Thirty-Three, it would like, with the President’s permission, to give a brief statement of its views on the problem of peace-keeping operations.

10.    The financial crisis which paralysed the work of the Assembly last year is fortunately moving towards a solution. But there is still much to be done before the Organization's constitutional crisis is solved. The respective functions and powers of the Security Council and the General Assembly must be established beyond all possible doubt. Some of us are aware that on this point opinions are totally divergent, although Article 24, paragraph 1, of the Charter is clear. I shall take the liberty of quoting it:

"In order to ensure prompt and effective action by the United Nations, its Members confer on the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and agree that in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalf."

11.    The fact that the Security Council has the principal and primary role in peace-keeping is beyond question. That is why my Government fully supports the principle of the collective responsibility of all Member States, while recognizing the special and nonexclusive responsibility of the permanent members of the Security Council.

12.    Our position is based on reasons which are well known and which derive from the principle of the sovereign equality of States in this Organization. My country cannot accept the idea that the five great Powers which have the veto should be the sole masters of the life and destiny of the world.

13.    We cannot accept, either, the idea that because a State is a permanent member of the Security Council, it can allow itself the luxury of paralysing the Council and thus permit a threat to international peace and security. This state of affairs must change. My Government therefore supports the idea of a revision of the Charter. We support the proposal that a new chapter on peace-keeping operations and the veto should be added to our Charter. It is essential that the United Nations should be remodelled so that it can better meet the needs of the time and act effectively.

14.    We believe that the countries of Africa, Asia, Latin America and Europe which are not permanent members of the Security Council have a role to play with respect to international peace and security. There can be no question of denying them the right to do so, since it is they which are, in many cases, the victims of aggression by one great Power or another,

15.    It is for that reason, if I may now turn to the question of the applicability of Article 19, that the Rwandese delegation wholeheartedly supports the principle that a Power which has committed aggression against another should be solely responsible for the consequences of such aggression. It should therefore bear in full any expenses arising out of the peacekeeping operations provided for in Chapter VI and VII of the Charter.

16.    This does not mean, however, that the Rwandese Government is opposed to the decision taken by the General Assembly on 1 September 1965 at the nineteenth session [1331st meeting] concerning voluntary contributions, which were suggested as a compromise solution by the Special Committee in order to restore the United Nations to solvency. In this matter my delegation will not go back on the past and will give its full support to the idea of the Afro-Asian group, of which it is proud to be a member.

17.    It is our hope that all Member States will do their utmost to ensure that the United Nations overcomes once and for all the temporary crisis it has just gone through and that it is in a position to work progressively for the aims it has set itself, namely, the maintenance of international peace and security, the development of friendly relations among nations based on the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and international co-operation in the economic, social and cultural fields, without distinction as to race, sex, languages or religion.

18.    As far as we are concerned, I can assure you that my Government will not spare any effort in supporting the action taken by the Organization in its efforts to promote peace and economic and social development for the sake of a better world founded on the fundamental principles of the Charter. It is my country’s firm belief that in the present historical circumstances, the United Nations represents, as Pope Paul VI said in his remarkable address to the General Assembly on 4 October, "the only path of modern civilization and world peace" [1347th meeting, para. 24].

19.    However, I wish to reiterate that, my delegation will refuse, as have all the other non-aligned delegations, to be a lackey of the imperialism of the great Powers which want to impose their will on us in the settlement of crises they have themselves provoked.

20.    Until there is disarmament, we cannot speak of genuine and lasting peace. The arms race is more and more a cause of grave concern for present and future generations, and particularly for the small countries which do not have the means of obtaining these destructive weapons. These countries are being subjected to a sort of neo-colonialism and a new paternalism. Certain great Powers even dare to assert that the small countries, because they do not have atomic weapons, can have no say in settling the problem of peace. But peace is no one's monopoly. It is of equal concern to all of us, and in this connexion my Government fully approves of the idea of a world conference on disarmament in which all nations would take part without any discrimination. It would indeed be absurd to think of, general and complete disarmament which was not agreed to by all the atomic Powers.

21.    My delegation greatly regrets the fact that the Eighteen-Nation Committee has not yet achieved any results. We had hoped for the conclusion of a general agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Our hopes, alas, were disappointed by the much regretted failure of the Committee. Everyone knows that the proliferation of nuclear weapons is the most urgent question of the hour, the one which has first claim on our attention in any discussion on disarmament.

22.    The Rwandese Government continues to hope that a treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and a convention prohibiting the use of such weapons will be concluded before it is too late. It was with this idea in mind that my delegation unhesitatingly associated itself with the other African States in requesting the inclusion in the General Assembly's agenda of the item entitled "Declaration on the denuclearization of Africa" [see A/5975].

23.    Rwanda, as I said on 21 May 1965 in the Disarmament Commission, "has always opposed the proliferation of nuclear weapons and will continue to do so". We firmly believe that man will not find true peace as long as he lives under the threat of collective annihilation.

24.    It is very disturbing, only a few months after the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the United Nations to find all over the world disputes which are at this moment poisoning international relations and threatening world peace and security. To the agonizing problems of disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons there are added all kinds of tensions, which may explode at any moment.

25.    My delegation is profoundly disturbed by the situation in South-East Asia which more and more, is taking on unimaginable and very serious proportions.

26. In recent weeks, we have witnessed a fratricidal conflict between two States: India and Pakistan. We the members of the Afro-Asian family welcomed with inexpressible joy and profound relief the news that a cease-fire had entered into force between those two great Asian countries as a result of the goodwill shown by the two belligerents and the unanimous decisions of the Security Council.   

27.    My delegation firmly believes that India and Pakistan will before long find a way to put an end to the conflict which sets them one against the other and which might, if prolonged, spread throughout the whole of South East Asia and beyond. We also fully approve the recommendations of the Security Council contained in Its resolutions dated 4 [209 (1965)], 6 [210 (1965)] and 20 September 1965 [211 (1965)], in which it called unanimously for the immediate cessation of hostilities and a lasting and fair settlement of the dispute. We venture to hope that India and Pakistan will implement the decisions and recommendations of the Council. We also hope for, and would even encourage, a summit meeting between the leaders of these two great countries at which they might consider together the possibility of putting an end to their differences. Moreover, my Government favours the holding of a referendum in the disputed region in order to allow the people of. Kashmir themselves to determine their own future. We consider that this is the only democratic way left to solve this distressing problem which has persisted for nearly twenty years.

28.    In the same connexion, the Assembly should, as the Minister for External Affairs of Canada said at the beginning of this session, "express clearly and forcefully the collective conviction of the United
Nations that the war in Viet-Nam must be brought to a negotiated settlement" [1335th meeting, para. 108], For our delegation, the solution of this problem lies in negotiation, in accordance with the principles of the Charter, As stated in Le Monde of 3 August 1965:
"It becomes clearer and clearer, as the conflict spreads in Viet-Nam, that there is almost no hope of finding a solution to it until the Americans and the Chinese make up their minds to respect certain principles."

29.    Any solution to this problem presupposes the dual principle of self-determination and non-interference by other countries in the internal affairs of Viet-Nam. To try to resolve it by force of arms is simply madness and an absurd idea. The Viet-Namese people must be given the chance, the opportunity to express their wishes as to their future, through free elections, and should not have ready-made solutions imposed on them from outside. We share the view expressed by several speakers that all foreign troops now confronting each other in that peaceful country should withdraw so that the Viet-Namese people may freely choose their own destiny. We address an urgent appeal to all those concerned to refrain from all interference and to do nothing which might compromise negotiations and the restoration of lasting peace in that part of the world.

30.    The time has come for the Assembly to devote all its energies to drawing up some form of charter for the peaceful settlement of disputes. My Government, which has adopted the principle of peaceful coexistence, even between States having different political systems, will support any initiative in this direction and takes this opportunity of expressing its satisfaction to the Government of the Soviet Union which asked for this question to be included in the agenda of the General Assembly [see A/5964].

31.    Furthermore, the problem raised by the absence of the People's Republic of China from the international community is becoming increasingly alarming. On account of that country's absence. United Nations decisions remain a dead letter and lose all their effectiveness since China is not bound by the Charter. This situation may seriously endanger world peace and security. China feels frustrated and wants to show, in this and in every way, that it is a great Power and that it must be recognized as such. The delegation of Rwanda considers that this problem deserves the attention of all and, consequently, that it must be carefully studied and examined, in the interest of peace in Asia and throughout the world.

32.    Out of concern for objectivity and realism, qualities which have long been shown by the people of Rwanda, its President and its Government, my delegation wishes here to endorse the appeal made by His Holiness Paul VI from this rostrum on 4 October 1965:
"... Strive to bring back among you any who may have left you, consider means of calling into your pact of brotherhood, in honour and loyalty, those who do not yet share in it. Act so that those still outside will desire and deserve the confidence of all; and then be generous in granting it." [1347th meeting, para. 31.]   

33.    For our part, we see no objection to the People's Republic of China participating in our deliberations. For a country whose population makes up one quarter of mankind and, what is more, which possesses atomic weapons, cannot be kept indefinitely outside this Organization, which claims to be universal. We should merely like to see China refrain henceforth from interfering in the internal affairs of other States and practise a policy of peaceful co-existence with countries which do not share the same political opinions. The fact that China represents one quarter of the world's population does not give it the right to preach revolution in Africa, nor to foster subversion in our countries.

34.    The Government of Rwanda has chosen a policy of non-alignment and will never be a "servant of any ideology", as Mr. Mpakaniye, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, has said. It is for this reason, moreover, that my Government has never hesitated to establish friendly and diplomatic relations with the countries of Eastern Europe. In our opinion, all States, whatever ideological bloc they may belong to, "which, in the interests of international peace and co-operation, offer to assist us in our struggle against poverty and under-development — a struggle which we hope will triumph — in order to bring the people of Rwanda to full and complete development,, will be counted among our best friends".

35.    There is another matter which is causing my delegation concern. I refer to the question of decolonization. The delegation of Rwanda has frequently made known its views on the subject and its profound indignation at the fact that so many territories in Africa and elsewhere stilt remain today under foreign rule.

36.    The attitude of Portugal is an unforgivable insult to the whole of Africa and a challenge to the conscience of mankind. The white minority in Southern Rhodesia is continuing to oppress the African majority of more than 3 million people. United Nations resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council have not been implemented, largely because those Powers which are members of NATO are acting as accomplices and share responsibility with these inveterate colonialists. Everyone knows today that the moral support given by NATO is attributable to a perfidious tendency to exploit Africa's natural and human resources.

37.    The United Kingdom will bear a grave responsibility if the white settlers unilaterally declare Rhodesia independent. In this connexion, I should like to recall what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda said before this Assembly during the eighteenth session:

"... we would urge the United Kingdom not to let slip, in Southern Rhodesia, its last chance of repairing the errors of the nineteenth century and, since it still retains sovereignty over that supposedly self-governing territory, not to grant it independence until a new Constitution and Government have been approved by a majority of all its citizens" [1235th meeting, paragraph 158].

38.    The delegation of Rwanda would like to renew that appeal today and to ask the members of the Commonwealth, especially the African and Asian members, to exert pressure on the United Kingdom Government in order to avert the tragedy being plotted by Mr. Smith and his clique. As for the position which my Government will adopt in the event of a unilateral declaration of independence by the white minority, Rwanda is determined to recognize the Rhodesian nationalist government and to grant it full support. In short, whatever is the attitude of the States members of the Organization of African Unity will also be ours.

39.    With reference to the territories administered by Portugal, we address a last appeal to Portugal's partners and allies to break their ties with that country. The African States will not tolerate much longer seeing their brothers in Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea and elsewhere continue to be exploited by Portuguese imperialism.

40.    The latent tension which exists in the south of the African continent might at any moment end in an explosion. To paraphrase Mr. Eduardo Mondlane, leader of the Mozambique Liberation Front (FRELIMO), nothing will be able to stop the African States and people, who, number more than 250 million, once they emerge from their torpor and decide to fight colonialism and imperialism with force until they achieve their final objective: the liberation of the whole of Africa.

41.    We therefore invite all States Members of the United Nations to co-operate with the Special Committee on decolonization the General Assembly and the Security Council in ensuring, before it is too late, that the legitimate desire for self-determination of the peoples still under foreign domination is fulfilled.

42.    The explosive situation which exists in the southern part of Africa is still further complicated by the threats, acts of violence, imprisonments, massacres and acts of brutality of all kinds which the puppet government of Mr. Verwoerd is inflicting on our African brothers in South Africa and South West Africa. All these violations of human rights and of the principles of the Charter must be censured and condemned unequivocally by the United Nations, by the adoption of practical measures such as, for example, economic sanctions against that country which continues to defy the conscience of the world and international public opinion.

43.    I have spoken of the situation in Asia and in Africa; I should now like to say a few words about the problem of Germany, which remains the central preoccupation of Europe today. This distressing question calls for an urgent solution. The delegation of Rwanda would like to appeal to the conscience of the great Powers responsible for the tragic and dramatic situation which has resulted in the partition of the German people. I am certain, I am firmly convinced that once the unity of that great people has been restored, Germany will make an important contribution to the cause of international peace and security.

44.    I cannot conclude my statement without saying a few words about my delegation's views on the question of development and international trade. The great Powers are still spending astronomical sums on atomic and space research while more than half mankind is living in utter poverty. Political decolonization is almost completed, but the countries of the third world still have to struggle against a new economic feudalism.

45.    The delegation of Rwanda welcomes the results, albeit meagre, already achieved by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and hopes that the permanent machinery which has ‘resulted from the Conference will be effectively assisted in pursuing the task which has already begun. As the French Minister for Foreign Affairs said, what is needed is to ensure that the earnings of the producers are stabilized at a suitable level [1341st meeting, para. 111]. It is the developing countries which are the main producers of raw materials and various tropical commodities. Justice must henceforth be done with regard to trade.

46.    We appreciate the very praiseworthy efforts exerted by the United Nations on behalf of the developing countries in the economic, trade and social fields. In this connexion, several studies have been made, and plans drawn up for a better organization of world trade. We must now move on to the operational phase and, as I have already said, the industrialized countries have a special responsibility in this sphere.

47.    The adoption of a Convention on Transit trade of land-locked States, of which my country is one, is, of course, very encouraging. But it is not enough. My delegation hopes that the Convention will soon be ratified by all Member States and will be put into effect at once. We also think that the under-developed countries which produce raw materials will be assured remunerative prices which will enable them to increase their production. A system of preferences should then be established to assist the industrial development of less favoured countries and, as a previous speaker put it, the developing countries should be allowed to institute a system of protection for their infant industries, in order to prevent unfair local competition by the highly industrialized countries.

48.    This year, which has rightly been designated "International Co-operation Year", the rich countries must make special efforts to assist less favoured countries in their struggle against poverty and under-development. The proposal was made here that 1 per cent of the national income of the economically developed countries should be set aside for aid to the under-developed countries; unfortunately nothing has 30 far been done about it.

49.    Another deplorable fact is that the rich countries often impose on us quite exorbitant rates of interest for development loans. This state of affairs certainly does not promote the economic and social progress of the young nations, nor does it contribute towards ensuring a balance in international economic relations and towards consolidating peace in the world.

50.    The Government and people of Rwanda would like to take this opportunity to pay a well-deserved tribute to the work of the Special Fund and the Technical Assistance Board for the aid they have provided to the developing countries, and especially for what they have done and are continuing to do in my own country. We also support the proposal of the Secretary-General that the programmes of these two bodies should be merged in order to increase their effectiveness and scope.

51.    Having reviewed the various problems Which face our Organization today, it only remains for my delegation to reaffirm its profound and unshakeable faith in the rules and principles of the United Nations Charter. My Government is still convinced that the United Nations is, at the present time, the ultimate hope of weak nations, and my delegation would like to express its most fervent wishes for the complete success of the Organization’s peace-keeping efforts. I am certain that, under the wise and competent guidance of our President, the twentieth session will contribute towards making the United Nations stronger and better able to restore peace, security and prosperity in the world.