154. Perhaps more than in the past, for the young Republic of Chad the problem of peace is closely linked to the problems of decolonization and the rehabilitation of man, whatever his characteristics. Peace cannot be envisaged without real international co-operation, without harmonious economic development.
155. After the difficulties of the nineteenth session, the United Nations seems, under your guidance, Mr. President, to be having a more calm and more promising session. The delegation of Chad takes this opportunity to offer you its warm congratulations on the occasion of your brilliant election as President of the twentieth session of the General Assembly.
156. I should like also to pay a tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Quaison-Sackey, who tried, so far as was humanly possible, to limit the serious consequences of the financial crisis suffered by our Organization during the nineteenth session. 157. While expressing once again our regret at the withdrawal of Indonesia from the United Nations and while deploring the rumours that other nations are threatening to do the same, I have great pleasure in welcoming, on behalf of my country, the delegations of Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore.158. On this occasion, the delegation of Chad expresses the hope that next year other countries still under foreign domination will achieve independence and will be able to come and make their contribution to the cause of peace within the Organization.
159. At this time of many and varied cares, when hotbeds of discord and tension appear in the world almost every month, I shall draw the attention of this Assembly to only the essential aspects of the problems which constitute a threat to peace and security in the world.
160. Today the eyes of the world are still turned anxiously towards Viet-Nam. Our country knows that this is one of the most dangerous centres of war, which must be rapidly contained. The Viet-Namese people, from whom the antagonism between blocs has already exacted a heavy toll, should be left to settle their future for themselves by free elections and by the choice of the régime which suits them.
161. The Indo-Pakistani conflict augured a difficult twentieth session. We were greatly relieved when the fighting stopped. The delegation of Chad wishes to pay a tribute to the Security Council for the speed of its decision and to congratulate the Secretary-General, U Thant, on his personal and beneficent action in the solution of this conflict.162. The conflicts which explode here and there — sometimes violent, sometimes spectacular — should draw the attention of all States Members of the United Nations to the other latent hotbeds of war. This is why my country thinks that the problems of the divided nations should be solved through negotiations and general elections under United Nations supervision.163. The necessary prerequisites for a lasting peace will not be achieved until all peoples can exercise their right to self-determination. The case of Southern Rhodesia is a matter of concern to our people and our Government. We do not think that the procedural battle joined between Salisbury and London will make it possible to solve the problem of decolonization on the basis of a democratic and just constitution. In this twentieth century, considerations of a racial nature cannot be the basis for a policy of independence. The interests of individuals should no longer stifle those of an organized community.
164. By practising genocide in Mozambique, Angola and so-called Portuguese Guinea, Portugal is defying the whole of mankind. Portuguese colonialism, although destined to disappear despite the secret assistance it is receiving, continues to sow death and devastation in certain parts of Africa. It undoubtedly constitutes a permanent source of armed conflict. The same is true of the Territory of South West Africa and it is time that the United Nations not only took the problem of this Protectorate in hand but found a speedy solution to it.
165. As for the policy of racial discrimination and apartheid pursued in South Africa, we have the impression that we are returning to the darkest ages of humanity. There is no better organized or more refined savagery. And to think that such a nation apparently has friends and allies to perpetuate the alienation of man!
166. It is here that. Africa recognizes its true friends. As for the Republic of Chad, it firmly believes that the United Nations still has a great role to play in this question facing all nations of good will.
167. As was said two days ago by a man who undoubtedly represents a great moral force in the world, the United Nations is still at the beginning of its efforts to construct a universal society. Chad, which has been a Member of the Organization for only five years, reaffirms its confidence in the United Nations and on the occasion of its twentieth anniversary, wishes it a very long life so that one day the objectives of the Charter may be fully achieved.
168. Ever since its creation, the United Nations has been evolving each year towards its true role. Young States become Members of the Organization, new problems arise for everyone. The equitable representation of the geographical regions within the various organs of the United Nations becomes necessary. The increase in the number of seats allocated to developing countries in the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council represents the beginning of a solution.
169. The Charter itself, however, must be altered and readapted to meet the wishes of young States and this is the only way in which the United Nations will be able to act effectively to promote a lasting peace.
170. As we tackle the present problem of economic development in our young country, we appreciate the close links which exist between economic inequalities and social inequalities. And this can be a threat to peace. For this reason, harmonious economic development and the social welfare of peoples should be the essential and ever-present goal of all Members of the United Nations. This does not mean simply keeping a number of countries in a state of economic dependence as markets and producers of raw materials and promoting still further the development of the already industrialized countries. We do not think that the machinery of economics will always turn in this direction without disadvantages for all. This is why my country hopes that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, whose aim is to promote the development of international trade and accelerate the economic expansion of the developing countries, will effectively achieve its objectives.
171. Although peace is threatened on all sides by colonialism, racism and hatred, by hotbeds of war and trouble and by under-development, it is threatened still more by the means of mass destruction possessed by certain Powers. We refer to nuclear and thermonuclear weapons. It is stated officially that five nations possess such weapons and unofficially that sixteen nations would be in a position to manufacture them within a few decades. 172. If it is true that the countries possessing these engines of destruction think that they will never use these weapons, it is nevertheless true that the arms race, on the pretext of establishing a balance, often ends in armed conflict. I do not think that any of us in this Hall would dare to contemplate war without alarm, particularly war with nuclear and thermonuclear weapons.
173. We shall not be able really to speak of lasting peace until disarmament is general and complete. The negotiations on this subject should bring together all States in the world, whether or not they possess the atomic bomb.
174. For the emerging and developing nations as well as for the powerful and industrialized nations, peace alone — universal peace — means long life and lasting prosperity.