20. Mr. President, the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic congratulates you on your election to the high post of President of the General Assembly and expresses the hope that, under your guidance, the twentieth session of the General Assembly will contribute by its work to the strengthening of international peace, and the development of cooperation between States, and also assist in the solution of the major international problems facing the United Nations. We should also like to thank Mr. Quaison-Sackey, the Foreign Minister of Ghana, who did so much as President of the nineteenth session of the General Assembly in order to assist the Assembly to cope with the difficulties confronting it and to resume its normal activity in accordance with the Charter of the Organization.
21. The Government and the people of the Ukraine express their profound satisfaction at the attainment of the agreement to a cease-fire between India and Pakistan. We hope that those two neighbouring countries will settle their controversial problems by peaceful means, and that they will follow the path of friendship and fraternal co-operation in the interests of the peoples of both countries and peace throughout the world. We also wish to mention the efforts made by the Security Council and the Secretary-General, U Thant, in the settlement of this armed conflict.
22. The United Nations is entering the third decade of its existence. The Government of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, one of the founding Members of this Organization, believes that the United Nations under the conditions of observance of the lofty principles and basic provisions of the Charter, can serve as an effective instrument for the maintenance of international peace and as a major centre of cooperation among States in the solution of international problems. The experience of the past activities of the United Nations has convincingly proved that it played a positive role, when it acted in accordance with the basic provisions of the Charter and kept abreast with the development of events in the world. Experience has also shown that when attempts were made to act in circumvention of the Charter, and when a certain group of States sought to use the United Nations for the attainment of their own imperialist policies in international relations, it was the Organization that suffered the failures.
23. Ever since the creation of the United Nations, the world has been undergoing substantial changes. Life does not stand still — it moves ahead. This is reflected in those tremendous changes that are taking place in the social, economic and political life of the peoples of different countries and whole continents. A third of the world's population is now Composed of the peoples of the world system of socialism, the existence of which is now a major feature of modern times. The peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America have become participants in international policy. Waging a staunch struggle, shaking off the fetters of colonialism and imperialism, they have stepped on to the road to freedom and national independence. They have arisen as architects of anew life and active participants in international policy. The fact of the existence of States with different social systems and the balance of forces in the world of today make it imperative to base international relations, including relations within the United Nations, on genuine equality and respect of sovereign rights of all countries both large and small. The principles of peaceful coexistence are receiving ever-increasing recognition.
24. However, some Powers, while talking about peaceful coexistence, believe that it is applicable only to relations between States equal in power, and, at the same time, dictate their will to small countries, trampling their rights, violating and infringing upon their sovereignty and independence. Such an imperialist policy of diktat and arbitrary rule in respect of other countries aggravates the international situation, gives rise to serious international conflicts and endangers peace and security.
25. South-East Asia, the Caribbean region, the southern part of Africa, where Portuguese colonialists are waging war against the peoples of Mozambique and Angola, South Arabia, where Great Britain is waging war against the champions of freedom, Central Europe, where the revenge-seekers of Bonn rear their heads — those are the centres of increasing tensions, the hotbeds where are to be found already burning or still smouldering coals that can be kindled into a conflagration. To bridle the imperialist aggressors, to safeguard peace and security, are at present the most urgent tasks.
26. The most dangerous situation exists in South-East Asia, where the armed forces of the United States are being used for direct intervention in the domestic affairs of South Viet-Nam and for aggressive actions against the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. A continual increase in the number of American armed forces in South Viet-Nam, their military operations against the National Liberation Front, have, in fact, turned the civil war in that country into a war of United States imperialists against the people of Viet-Nam. The American imperialists are subjecting the territory of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam to barbarous bombings thus committing open aggression against that heroic socialist Asian State.
27. It was with a sense of profound indignation that the Ukrainian delegation listened to the statement of the United States representative [1346th meeting], who tried to justify his Government's unlawful interference in the domestic affairs of the freedom-loving people of Viet-Nam. By what right do the American imperialists send their troops thousands of miles away in order to suppress the liberty of the people of South Viet-Nam and to interfere in their domestic affairs? There is no justification and never can be for the aggressive actions of the United States in Viet-Nam.
28. The Ukrainian people strongly condemn the United States aggression in Viet-Nam and express their solidarity with the people of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam who are fighting against American imperialism. The only possible basis for the settlement of the situation in Viet-Nam lies in implementing the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Indo-China, the cessation of the barbarous bombing of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, the withdrawal of all the armed forces of the United States and its allies from South Viet-Nam and giving the Viet-Namese people the opportunity to decide their own fate.

29. It is well know to the entire world that the United States policy is one of interference in the internal affairs of other countries. The events in Viet-Nam are not the only proof. In Stanleyville, the United States, the United Kingdom and Belgium undertook a military action in an effort to interfere in that country's struggle and to deal a mortal blow to the national patriotic forces.
30. The United States interfered rudely in the internal affairs of the Dominican Republic. No sooner did the population of that country rise against the dictatorship of the military junta and demand restoration of the constitution that the American Marines landed there. The Dominican Republic is at present occupied by the United States, under the guise of the inter-American military forces, against the will of the people. The imperialist circles of the United States are now seeking to establish these forces on a permanent basis in order to have them on call for armed interference in the affairs of any people of Latin America.
31. Everybody knows the policy which the United States is pursuing in relation to Cuba. It is for the Cuban people alone to decide their destiny, whether the United States likes it or not.
32. Political and economic pressures, blackmail, economic blockade, and smuggling of armed bandits, military intervention — this is only an incomplete list of the means of interference used by the imperialists.
33. On the first day of the general debate in the Assembly, a great deal was said from this rostrum about the lofty ideals of the United Nations, of the necessity to keep burning in the hearts of the people of this earth the fires of freedom, of making people free from fear, and of the responsibility to "keep the candle of peace glowing". But what kind of "freedom from fear "can there be if it is asserted by the bayonets of marines? What kind of "candle of peace” can there be if it serves to detonate napalm bombs which set fire to towns and villages in Viet-Nam? The flowery phrases about the lofty ideals of the United Nations and about the freedom of peoples and their right to self-determination will be worthless if no resolute measures are taken against the actions of the aggressive forces headed by the imperialists of the United States.
34. Recently, intensified efforts have been made to put the aggressive acts on a "theoretical foundation", to "legalize" interference in the internal affairs of States and peoples. A theory which is very dangerous to the cause of peace is being propounded, according to which there is no difference between national liberation and civil wars, on the one hand, and wars between States, on the other. The imperialist "doctrine of globalism", according to which the United States assumes the right to interfere in the internal affairs of any country in any part of the globe, is again brought to light. In the well-known book My Hope for America, whose author stands at the helm of United States policy, the use of force in the field of international relations is expressly propounded. "There is no place in today's world for weakness", writes its author, and calls for using the entire might of the United States to "resolutely oppose" communism. The fabrications about the "communist threat" are produced on nearly every occasion where there is a need to disguise interference in the internal affairs of States and violations of their sovereignty.
35. Is it not a mockery of the principles of the United Nations when, a day before the opening of the present session of the General Assembly, the House of Representatives of the United States Congress adopts an unprecedented resolution authorizing armed intervention by the United States in any country of Latin America under the pretext of a struggle against communism? How does that conform with the United Nations Charter or even with the charter of the Organization of American States, which contain direct prohibitions on the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or interference in the internal affairs of States? No considerations of a political, economic or other character, no inventions about the communist threat, can justify violation of those provisions of the United Nations Charter. The purpose which the imperialist forces pursue in interfering in the internal affairs of States or peoples, in whatever form it may be expressed, is to hinder and suppress the process of development of the national liberation struggle, to stop the progress of peoples towards political and economic independence and to keep them in the sphere of economic exploitation and political domination of the imperialists.
36. We condemn so strongly and so frankly the actions of the forces of imperialism and aggression, not because of a desire to inflame passions and exacerbate the working atmosphere at this session, but because these actions constitute a serious threat to world peace and are incompatible with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. It is necessary to make the practice of international relations free from dictate and arbitrary rule and from interference in the internal affairs of States and to pave the way for international co-operation both in the framework of the United. Nations and outside it.
37. International co-operation is possible only when it is accompanied by strict observance of the principles of equality and self-determination of nations, by noninterference in the internal affairs of States and by peaceful coexistence among nations with different social and economic systems. Therefore the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic believes that the General Assembly should solemnly confirm the aforementioned principles — upon which the United Nations Charter is based — in the manner suggested in the draft declaration "on the inadmissibility of interference in the domestic affairs of States and the protection of their independence and sovereignty", introduced by the delegation of the Soviet Union [see A/5977].
38. It is impossible also to pass over in silence the situation. in Europe. It is high time that the vestiges of the Second World War were done away with and the situation in Europe normalized. The solution of the problem of a peaceful German settlement would respond to the vital interests of peace and security in Europe and would contribute to a normalization of the entire international situation. A peaceful German settlement is possible only on the basis of recognition of the fact of the existence of the two German States, that is, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, and of the territory of West Berlin. The realistic way to a rapprochement of both German States and to the peaceful unification of the German people is stated in the manifesto of the People's Chamber of the German Democratic Republic dated 5 May 1965. This peaceful programme, inspired by a sense of responsibility for the future of the German people and for the destinies of peace, as stated in the manifesto, is fully supported by the Ukrainian people, who, in the span of one generation, went through two world wars unleashed by German imperialism.
39. The European socialist countries have put forward a programme for consolidating peace in Europe by creating a system of collective security. In this respect we consider worthy of attention the proposal of the Polish People's Republic concerning the convening of a conference of European States to discuss measures of European collective security, a freeze of nuclear armaments and creation of an atom-free zone in central Europe; the proposal of the German Democratic Republic for the renunciation of atomic weapons by both German States; the proposal of the Socialist Republic of Romania concerning improvement of neighbourly relations among European States; and the proposal for the signing of a non-aggression pact between the States of the Warsaw Treaty Organization and the member States of NATO.
40. It is with profound concern that we watch the politicians of Bonn and those who protect them carefully growing the tree of militarism and revanchism which bears a striking resemblance to the tree from which the evil seeds of the Second World War spread all over Europe and throughout the world.
41. The ruling circles of the Federal Republic of Germany, with the downright connivance of the United States and some other countries, openly declare their revenge-seeking programme regarding the German Democratic Republic and the territories belonging to Poland, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union. Day in and day out the West German revanchists, using any occasion or any political undertaking, call for the revision of the borders in Europe. They want to question the fact that these borders have been established as a result of the Second World War and are not liable to any revision. The Governments of certain countries should long ago have stopped defending such an attitude on the part of Bonn, and. the sooner they do so the stronger will be peace in Europe.
42. The politicians of Bonn support their demands for the revision of borders in Europe by active measures aimed at a revival of German militarism. At present the armed forces of the Federal Republic of Germany are numerically the strongest in Western Europe and they are equipped with almost all types of modern weapons, including rockets. Ex-Nazi generals and officers are in command of the army; they have assumed high offices in NATO and exert a decisive influence in shaping the strategy of that military alliance. It seems that, to some people, it makes no difference who gives orders to the Bundeswehr. But it makes a great deal of difference to the Ukrainian people. Those who have sown death and destruction are again taking in their hands the military helm and the guidance of affairs of state in West Germany. The Government of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic has repeatedly demanded and continues to demand that Nazi criminals be prosecuted. The conscience of the Ukrainian people as well as that of all peace-loving peoples cannot accept the fact that criminals who committed the most horrid crimes against peace and humanity remain unpunished, no matter what the pretext.
43. It is not a will for vengeance that leads us to demand punishment for all war crimes, but our concern to prevent such crimes in the future. All that happened twenty years ago might, to certain people, seem pure theory about a mere episode of the past; but for the Ukrainian people it was the hardest period in their history. We shall never be able to forget that the fascists annihilated 4.5 million civilians in the Ukraine and that they took 2 million more people to Germany for forced labour and that they destroyed 714 towns and 28,000 villages. The Ukrainian soil is strewn with the graves of our fathers and mothers, sisters, brothers and children. And what a great number of sons and daughters of the Ukraine, together with their brothers and sisters of other Soviet peoples and the peoples of Europe, were burnt in concentration camps such as Majdanek, Auschwitz and other death factories which were created by the evil genius of German imperialism and will forever remain its shame!
44. There is not a single family in our Republic to which the war did not bring irreparable losses. The many monuments to the victims of fascism will always remind us that nothing and nobody is forgotten. Years have passed, and the grief for millions of dead has not been blotted out of the memories of the Soviet people. Their graves will never be forgotten by the people.
45. Our people made a substantial contribution to the defeat of the Hitlerite invaders. That is why they have a sacred right to demand, and they do demand, that the way to the revival of West German revenge seeking and militarism should be blocked. We appeal to all peoples to be vigilant. The revenge-seeking adventurers in Bonn are already taking aim against peace in Europe.
46. But, of extreme danger to the cause of peace are the demands by the ruling circles of the Federal Republic of Germany that the Bundeswehr should be equipped with nuclear weapons. The representatives of the Bonn Government declare without much ceremony that they have a "right" to have their own nuclear weapons, and they even present that claim in the form of an ultimatum. Surrendering to the extortions of Bonn, the ruling circles of the United States and the United Kingdom are trying to find ways to satisfy the atomic appetite of the West German revenge-seekers and at the same time to present themselves as opponents of the dissemination of nuclear weapons. It is impossible to imagine more inconsistent actions and intentions. Having
taken cognizance of the draft treaty on the non-dissemination of nuclear weapons introduced by the United States in the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee, the Ukrainian Government has come to the conclusion that this treaty would open the way for the transfer of nuclear weapons to those States not now possessing them. The Western Powers openly declare that the proposals put forward by the United States in Geneva contain no obstacles to prevent the West German revenge-seekers and militarists from getting nuclear weapons through multilateral or Atlantic nuclear forces of NATO. Thus, just as before, Western plans include giving access to weapons of mass destruction to the Bonn revenge-seekers, whose actions and policy are military threats in Europe and, consequently, in the whole world.
47. Lately, on numerous occasions, responsible representatives of the West have claimed that in the dissemination of nuclear weapons in the world they see a real danger for the cause of peace. If they want such statements to be believed, the Western Powers should give up their plans for the establishment of multilateral or Atlantic nuclear forces of NATO.
48. The draft treaty on the non-dissemination of nuclear weapons introduced on behalf of the Soviet Government by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. A. A. Gromyko, [see A/5976] for the consideration of the present session of the General Assembly rules out both direct and indirect access to those weapons on the part of non-nuclear States. The conclusion of such a treaty would avoid the dangerous consequences of the further dissemination of nuclear weapons and would considerably contribute to the prevention of a nuclear war. The Ukrainian delegation fully supports that draft treaty.
49. The Government of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic considers it necessary to strive towards the implementation of general and complete disarmament, as well as of such partial measures as the prohibition of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons, the establishment of denuclearized zones, the elimination of foreign military bases on foreign soil and the withdrawal of foreign troops. The Ukrainian Government again declares that it fully supports the proposal to convene a world disarmament conference, to be attended by all nations wishing to participate in it.
50. There are a number of agenda items dealing with one of the most urgent problems of our time: the problem of the complete and final liquidation of colonialism.
51. Almost five years have passed since the United Nations adopted, on the initiative of the Soviet Union, the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples. Colonialism has suffered a serious defeat. Many of the peoples of the world have won their freedom and independence only after a stubborn and difficult struggle. But the task of liquidating colonialism is far from being accomplished.


52. In this century we cannot tolerate that peoples and nations should still be kept in bondage by the forces of colonial barbarism and savagery. The dark night of colonialism has lasted all too long for the peoples of Angola, Mozambique, Southern Rhodesia, South West Africa, Bechuanaland, Swaziland, Basutoland, South Arabia, Oman, British Guiana and other territories.
53. Members are all aware of the great amount of time that was devoted to the discussion of colonial problems at previous sessions of the General Assembly. They are also aware of the large number of excellent resolutions and recommendations that were adopted and approved. Our delegation believes that the time of persuasion and good intentions is past. The General Assembly should decisively and unequivocally demand that the colonial Powers implement the decisions embodied in the epoch-making anti-colonial Declaration — that is, immediately grant freedom and the right of self-determination to the peoples of all colonial territories. The colonial peoples are selflessly carrying on their struggle for freedom and national independence against the forces of colonialism and imperialism.
54. With regard to the discussion of the question of the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations, the Ukrainian delegation would like to state that its position is based first and foremost on the provisions of the Charter. We would like to stress again that so far as questions of the maintenance of world peace and security are concerned, it is the Security Council which bears the main responsibilities under the Charter. The Security Council alone is authorized to take all decisions concerning the organization, the carrying out and the financing of appropriate United Nations operations. Under the Charter, the General Assembly may discuss any question relating to the maintenance of international peace and security, and make recommendations. However, any such questions on which action is necessary should be referred to the Security Council by the General Assembly, either before or after discussion. This provision is crystal clear in Article 11 of the United Nations Charter. This provision determines the complete and indivisible responsibility of the Security Council for any operation that could be undertaken by the United Nations in order to maintain peace and stop aggression.
55. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic opposes any attempts to violate Charter provisions in this vital sphere of the activities of the Organization. We should like also to state that we cannot be indifferent to the opinion expressed in certain circles alleging that the Charter is outdated, that it does not meet today's requirements. The Ukrainian delegation holds that the United Nations Charter has withstood the test of time and still provides the necessary basis for concerted actions by States in the interests of peace and international co-operation.
56. Being concerned with the fate and good name of our Organization, we cannot but express, in a few words, our opinion on the way that the United Nations finances are being managed. One cannot but notice the fact that the Budget estimates increase year after year, and that year after year the estimate is exceeded. We are completely in agreement with the Foreign Minister of France, who pointed out that a situation of this kind is completely inadmissible. With regard to expenditures of the United Nations, a strict order should be established in accordance with the Charter and the financial regulations of the United Nations. Over-expenditure of the estimate allocation should be considered as inadmissible.
57. A task of special urgency today seems to be that of making the United Nations a universal world organization. For this purpose, it is necessary first of all to restore the legitimate rights of the People's Republic of China in this Organization. There is also a pressing need for the simultaneous admission to the United Nations of the two German States, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany. Only when the United Nations has become a representative world Organization will it be able to function as an effective organ of international cooperation which takes into account the interests of all peoples.
58. We should like to take this pleasant opportunity to welcome the new Members to the United Nations — the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore — and wish the people of those States success and prosperity in their national development.
59. The Ukrainian delegation has always sought actively to participate in discussing and finding solutions to economic, social, legal and cultural problems. It is gratifying for us to note that the agenda of the present session contains three items that were included on the initiative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. These are: the role of the United Nations in training national technical personnel for the accelerated industrialization of the developing countries; a world campaign for universal literacy, and measures to accelerate the promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. When those questions are being discussed, we expect to receive the cooperation of other delegations.
60. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held in Geneva last year made a number of positive decisions concerning the most important problems of economic and trade relations. It was a constructive beginning, however modest, in the normalization of international trade. The present session of the General Assembly will have to consider the question of the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference. To bring those recommendations into effect, much work will be required, first of all, to solve such problems as the establishment of a universal international trade organization, the implementation of new and just principles in the international economic relations, the elimination of discrimination based on political considerations in international trade, the expansion of trade between East and West, and other questions.
61. I should like to state once more that our people are staunch champions of peace. Together with the other Soviet Republics which created the mighty Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Ukraine is building, with inspiration, a new society based on scientific socialism and communism. This society is based on the ideology of true equality among all human beings and all peoples. There is no place in it for the exploitation of man by man. There is no place in it for racial, national or any other discrimination. Every person is a toiler, and the production of material wealth and all the wealth are at the disposal of the whole people. The Soviet State guarantees work, education free of charge at all stages, free medical treatment and social security for all. Our motto is, "all is for man, all is in the name of man".
62. All the peoples of the Soviet Union will soon celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the great October socialist Revolution accomplished by workers and peasants under the guidance of the party of the great Lenin. Masters of their own destiny, our people in the years of Soviet power have changed beyond recognition the face of the country and their own life. Our Republic has been, turned into a country of universal literacy with a high level of science and culture. In a number of the most important fields, such as cast iron, steel, iron ore, and coal, our country has left behind most developed capitalist countries in per capita production. Those are the fruits of our people's toil and of the assistance of all the peoples of the Soviet Union.

63. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic is a sovereign and free State in the great fraternal family of the Soviet Republics. We Ukrainians cannot but express our surprise and indignation at the fact that, in the United States, there is organized officially each year a funeral feast for the anti-national régime which was thrown out by the Ukrainian people into the junkyard of history half a century ago. Our Government, our people, consider those actions by certain United States circles to be interference in the domestic affairs of the Ukrainian State. We mention this because such actions are incompatible with the obligations of the Member States under the Charter.

64. The Government and people of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic favour the development of friendly and good neighbourly relations among all States and peoples. They want the principles of peaceful coexistence to become a law in relations between States with different social and economic systems. The securing of peaceful coexistence requires the creation of the most favourable conditions for peace and progress.
65. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, in accordance with the will of its Government and people, will consistently support all moves of the General Assembly toward the consolidation of peace. We are convinced that the United Nations can and should carry out its duty towards humanity, and we expect that the twentieth session of the General Assembly will be able to contribute to the accomplishment of this important and noble task of the United Nations.
