At the outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend to you my sincere congratulations on your election to the important and responsible post of the Presidency of the present session, and to wish you success in achieving the aims and purposes of the Charter, for which the General Assembly has been convened.
71.	It is a source of great pleasure for us that the inauguration of this session has been marked by a most important and historic event, the increase in the membership of the United Nations. I wish once again to extend the sincere welcome of the Afghan people and Government to the representatives of these fourteen nations and, through them, to their peoples and Governments.
72.	With the increased number of Members the Organization is approaching the ideal of universality. We hope that this forum of independent voices of mankind will be completed soon through the attainment of independence by the dependent peoples, and that it will lead to the realization of a united, free world in the true sense. It is our fervent hope that the Organization will thus become a power strong enough to overcome the difficulties confronting mankind, in the interest of humanity, on the basis of justice and equality, and for the preservation of a peace founded upon the legitimate rights of individuals and nations.
73.	In this connexion we believe that the right of the People's Republic of China to its rightful place in the United Nations should be implemented without any further delay. This belief does not emanate only from the fact that China is our neighbour, and that we have diplomatic relations with China. It is based also upon the fact that the Government of the People's Republic of China is the only legitimate government representing the Chinese people. The exclusion of this great nation from the United Nations is in no way in the interest of the Organization, and is in fact a denial of the principle of universality of the United Nations.
74.	The meeting of the General Assembly of the United Nations is certainly the most important international event. At this session special interest has been demonstrated by the Member States in the solution of the great problems confronting the Organization, and therefore the occasion is more momentous. The significance of such an occasion calls, before everything else, for an increased sense of responsibility and an unselfish attitude and approach which would be in the interest of mankind; The occasion can bring about a great many constructive and fruitful results, but failure to use such an opportunity for constructive ends could lead to most discouraging consequences.
75.	In the face of the threat-to humanity, the shifting of blame from one side to another will neither shift the responsibility for unfavourable consequences nor save anyone from the destructive results which will be ultimately universal.
76.	Our failures in the past, outside the United Nations, should in no way deprive us of cherishing the hope that this Organization, set up for peaceful negotiations, will provide everyone with the means of better understanding, particularly the big Powers, who can better hear the cry of humanity for peace and prosperity. These failures have been rightly deplored, but, welcoming the most important and indeed greatly significant fact that the United Nations is the ultimate repository of world problems, we hope for the peaceful solution of even the most complicated problems.
77.	There are many issues before us — all of them the great concern of the United Nations and all its Members — which will be discussed by the General Assembly in due course. At this stage, however, I shall confine myself to a few most urgent points.
78.	I speak strictly for a small, peace-loving country, with a most impartial and independent position in international affairs, having the deepest conviction in the United Nations, the only alliance to which we belong under its Charter, where our record is well known, and our friendship with all cannot be questioned. We are confident, therefore, that our views will be considered in the most friendly spirit in which we express them.
79.	The greatest and most natural concern of the small countries is the prevailing international tension and the continuation of the "cold war". There is no doubt that the lessening of international tension, mostly caused by ideological differences and political interests, is in the custody of the big Powers. In the United Nations, however, that division greatly concerns the small countries which comprise the majority. The responsibility of these countries, therefore, cannot and should not be underestimated, either by themselves or by the big Powers. Not only are these countries desirous of making a positive contribution to the cause of peace, but they are capable of doing so and we hope that they will give to the Assembly the benefit of their independent judgement of world affairs.
80.	In our opinion, the most urgent task before the Assembly, in the present circumstances, is to concentrate on the Ways and means of eliminating the fundamental causes which have created the international problems and on the factors which have delayed their solution, rather than to attempt the solution of the problems directly, without the preparation of a healthy atmosphere which could mean the end of the cold war. There is obviously no other way than to address, on behalf of the General Assembly, an urgent appeal to the big Powers to enter immediately into peaceful negotiations to this end.
81.	Each day brings with it further proof that peaceful coexistence among peoples and nations is imperative. The failure to recognize this fact would lead to a complete deterioration of the international situation, with grave and even disastrous consequences. The United Nations is in itself the highest expression that mankind has given to this principle, after suffering from disastrous experiences. Therefore, the failure of the United Nations to implement this principle would be the greatest source of discouragement to all peace-loving peoples of the world.
82.	The only position from which it will be possible to realize the peaceful aspirations of man and the security and prosperity of the world is the position of mutual confidence among all, particularly among those who otherwise could choose the, position of strength. While it is certain that the opportunity provided by this session can be used for greater results, the least that can be expected is that everything should be done to avoid further deterioration of the international situation. The solution of the problem of disarmament depends solely on the confidence of the big Powers in each other and on their good will towards humanity. The importance of the issue to the small countries, however, is in no way diminished by this consideration.
83.	Last year when the question came before the General Assembly, we stated that we welcomed the proposals advanced for complete disarmament by the Government of this Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which were referred to as basic and comprehensive. We stated also that we would welcome wholeheartedly any other initiative, regardless of its source, which would lead in the direction of disarmament.
84.	The proposals of the United States do not differ in principle from the course directed to general and complete disarmament. Therefore there is a great margin of agreement on the basic issues. It is encouraging that the leaders of the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics have expressed their willingness to resume negotiations. This is greatly appreciated. The achievement of this goal will not only answer the expectations of the smaller countries' in the United Nations but will respond to the aspirations of millions of people who await the fruitful results of this important gathering.
85.	We adhere to our view that, in any measures that may be taken, the importance of the consideration that the goal should remain total disarmament, under effective international control and inspection, should be stressed, and at the same time practical steps, particularly in the field of nuclear weapons, should not be further delayed.
86.	The question of disarmament is essentially and primarily the responsibility of the United Nations. This fact is iso recognized by the big Powers. It can he said with hope that the General Assembly could succeed in taking certain measures which would compensate for the failure of efforts that have been made outside the United Nations.
87.	We adhere also to our view that a world without arms would be a new order in the life of nations. In any new order, the secure position of the small countries themselves is of utmost importance to us. We highly appreciate the references to the effect that as a result of disarmament more assistance would be available to the under-developed areas of the world, but we would like to add immediately that, although our needs are enormous, our primary concern continues to be the maintenance of peace and security, the only condition in which the under-developed countries can hope for the fulfilment of their desire for a better life. We believe that, as long as the domination of one nation by another is not abolished in all its forms, neither the abolition of arms, nor economic assistance on any scale will complete the happiness to which man is entitled by his right to independence and dignity.
88.	This session of the General Assembly, at which we have admitted a great number of independent States, offers us a unique opportunity to concentrate our efforts on the realization of the aspirations of the dependent peoples. The progress made in this field is encouraging but by no means satisfactory. No one can rightly be content as long as there are dependent peoples in this world. The policies of certain countries must inevitably give way to the right of self-determination and independence for these peoples.
89.	The situation in connexion with the problem of Algerians — one of these peoples — is most deplorable. It would be unnatural to speak of ending the cold war, and express no concern over the hot war continuing in Algeria. The deliberate delay in the peaceful solution of this problem, on the part of the French Government, is most alarming. It will be a matter of great regret if certain major issues, like the Algerian issue, are overshadowed by other problems merely because those problems have arisen more recently. We hope that the General Assembly will give high priority, at this session, to the consideration of the Algerian problem in the light of the most discouraging new developments and that it will take appropriate measures to implement Its resolutions, recommendations and hopes for a peaceful solution of the question. We hope that this year, which has been referred to as the year of Africa, will have in it the dawn of the independence of Algeria, without which the African horizon will remain clouded by colonialism.
90.	The Algerians have agreed to a solution based on the right of self-determination, a right which the French had accepted in principle. We maintain high hopes that the legitimate aspirations of all peoples will be realized, and we are happy to see that the triumph of self-determination, without which peace cannot be maintained, is a real source of pride for foe peoples of the United Nations. But this pride cannot be fully enjoyed if it is recognized in certain cases and denied in others,
91.	The most disturbing events in the Republic of the Congo, now a Member State, have been the concern of the United Nations in more than one respect. We supported the resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its emergency session [1474 (ES-IV)], with the hope that the assistance of the United Nations, in the light of the experiences gained by the Organization since its involvement with the problems of this young State, would serve the purpose of stability and of law and order in this unhappy country. In any measures that may be taken in this connexion, we would Stress the fact that all the Members of the Organization should give the utmost consideration to the significance of United Nations prestige, which is so directly involved.
92.	The constructive contribution of the independent African States in this matter is undoubtedly of special significance. The countries of Asia have always, in the spirit of solidarity among African-Asian nations, demonstrated their concern over the situations in the African continent and have contributed to the cause of the peoples of Africa. We hope that, before long, the people of the Congo will be able to have the representatives of their rightful Government participating in the United Nations.
93.	References have been made to the maintenance of peace and tranquillity in the Middle East, a region to which Afghanistan belongs. The expression by these countries of their desire for friendly relations is a source of satisfaction to us. No country has ever been more ready to respond to the call of friendship and neighbourly relations than Afghanistan. We have followed, and shall follow, this policy as the fundamental basis of our international relations with all countries, particularly with our neighbours. In this connexion, however, I should add that the elimination of differences cannot be achieved except by serious efforts, through peaceful negotiations, for the solution of the problems which have caused friction between the countries of this region.
94.	We wish to maintain good and friendly relations with all our neighbours, and therefore we sincerely respond to the spirit of amity voiced here by the distinguished representative of Iran [870th meeting].
95.	We have studied the annual report of the Secretary-General [A/4390 and Add.1], containing many important ideas, all of which, as I said at the beginning, can be taken up by the General Assembly at the proper stages of its work. There is one point, however, to which I should like to refer now, and that is the question of the development of the under-developed countries. The views of Afghanistan on this matter have been made known in the General Assembly and also in the Economic and Social Council. The responsibility of the United Nations in this connexion, regarding the new areas of under-development, has been rightly recognized. But special consideration as to its effect on other areas of responsibility is required.
