As the representative of the People's Republic of Albania, I am happy to convey sincere greetings to the United Nations General Assembly from the Albanian Government and people and to wish it success in its important work.
2.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania highly values the noble part played by the United Nations, to the establishment of which the Albanian people made its contribution by its self-sacrificing struggle against nazism and fascism shoulder to shoulder with the other allied peoples. The policy of our peaceable State shows that the Albanian Government respects the fundamental Purposes and Principles of the United Nations Charter.
3.	A year ago the General Assembly was conducting its work in a relatively relaxed international atmosphere. Of great importance in this connexion were the Soviet Government's proposals on general and complete disarmament [A/4219]. These proposals, and also the agreement which had been reached on the convening of the Summit Conference between the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France, engendered hopes for the strengthening of international peace and security.
4.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania, which has always striven and will continue to strive for peace and friendship among the peoples and for the triumph of the policy of peaceful coexistence, welcomed and actively supported that favourable trend in international relations which appeared a year ago.
5.	We are bound, however, to note that this year the General Assembly's session is taking place in an atmosphere of tension, in an international situation strained as a result of the cold war and "position of Strength" policy which is being followed by imperialist reactionary circles.
6.	The eyes of the world are now on this international forum, and the peoples expect, justifiably, that the United Nations will find ways and means of eliminating the threat of war and maintaining a tenable peace. There can be no doubt that the participation of high-level statesmen from a number of countries creates favourable conditions for making progress, during this General Assembly's work, towards the strengthening of peace.
7.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania considers that, in the present situation of increased tension, there is no more sacred duty, for every Government truly aware of its responsibility to its people and to mankind, than to devote its whole energy to the cause of maintaining international peace and security.
8.	It is an indisputable fact that the socialist system exists and flourishes side by side with the capitalist system, irrespective of the wishes of certain groups or Governments whose main purpose is to perpetuate the capitalist system and to destroy the socialist system.
9.	Under these new historical circumstances, our Government is deeply convinced that the only way to ensure peace and to save mankind from a third world war is through the peaceful coexistence of the two social systems.
10.	The People's Republic of Albania stands firmly for peaceful coexistence, because the Albanian people is against war and because peace is the very essence of the socialist regime which was established in our country sixteen years ago. This is shown in the whole activity of the People's Republic of Albania and in its peaceful policy. We regard coexistence as a necessary element in the international relations between the two systems at this particular stage of human development.
11.	But whereas the socialist States, the independent national States and the countries pursuing a policy of neutrality (which the Albanian Government supports and values as a contribution to the cause of peace), as well as broad sections of the people in the capitalist countries themselves, strongly advocate and actively strive for peaceful coexistence, reactionary circles in the United States and its allies are clearly antagonistic to the policy of peaceful coexistence and are following a policy that leads to war.
12.	In order to prevent the relaxation of tension, reactionary circles in the United States have engaged in overt acts of aggression, such as the dispatch of the U-2 aircraft over Soviet territory on 1 May 1960. That event, as is known, torpedoed the Summit Conference and led to an aggravation of the whole situation. The President of the United States made a statement, unprecedented in the annals of diplomatic history, proclaiming espionage to be the official and legal policy of the United States. How can such actions be compatible with peaceful coexistence? These acts are gross violations of the principles of the United Nations Charter, and of the fundamental principle governing the relations between sovereign States in peace-time; they constitute a challenge to every State which values national sovereignty and peace.
13.	The Government of the Peopled Republic of Albania considers that respect for the national sovereignty of every State is basic to normal and peaceful relations between States. We cannot therefore but condemn, as highly dangerous to the cause of peace, this attitude of the United States Government; and we fully support the perfectly correct position adopted by the Soviet Union, as being the only right and proper position for a State defending its inviolability and, therefore, peace.
14.	The General Assembly is to consider at this session the question of aggressive actions of the United States of America against the Soviet Union. The delegation of the Peopled Republic of Albania supports this initiative and will in due course state its point of view on this subject. The People’s Republic of Albania, likewise, is a constant target for the hostile policy of ruling circles in the United States. The item which is to be debated is of concern to all free and sovereign peoples, as it involves the policy of a great Power whose absurd dream it is to destroy the freedom and independence of other people and to establish its own hegemony everywhere. Indeed, this aggressive policy is directed not only against the Soviet Union, the People’s Republic of China and the other people’s democracies, but also against all countries which do not submit to American imperialism and which wish to live in freedom. The whole world is witness to the policy of blackmail and pressure, plots and aggression which is being practiced by the United States against the heroic Cuban people. The tragic events in the Congo,, the intervention in Laos, the innumerable crimes in South Viet-Nam, and the economic, political and military pressure on numerous other countries of the world — all this has its source in the aggressive policy of the reactionary imperialist circles, and first and foremost in the policy of the United States of America. Recent events in South Korea, Turkey and Japan show that, even in those countries where the Position of the American imperialists has been regarded as "extremely strong", the people are finding the interference and dictation of the United States intolerable.
15.	The cause of peace is, for all peoples of the world, the most sacred cause. No single people in the world wants war. War is desired only by the enemies of the people, by the reactionary imperialist circles for whom the production of armaments, and the blood of the peoples spilt by the weapons that those circles manufacture, are sources of enrichment. It is now clear to all the peoples of the globe that the camp of socialism has become an. indestructible stronghold of peace throughout the world and a decisive obstacle to the aggressive plans and aggressive policy of imperialism. The peace zone is continually expanding. The antiimperialist national-liberation struggle of the oppressed colonial peoples, which is demolishing the colonial system, constitutes one of the most significant phenomena of our time and is a very important factor in the defence of peace.
16.	A few days ago we had the great satisfaction of welcoming thirteen African States and the Republic of Cyprus, all of which achieved their independence this year, to membership in the United Nations. The Albanian people and Government, which have always sympathized with the national-liberation struggle of the oppressed colonial peoples, heartily rejoice at this historic victory. The People’s Republic of Albania is ready to co-operate with all the new States in the cause of peace, freedom and progress for the peoples. We are also certain that the day is not far off when the heroic and self-sacrificing struggle of our brothers the Algerian people will be crowned with the achievement of freedom and national independence, when no people in Asia, Africa or elsewhere will any longer suffer under the yoke of colonial dependence.
17. The shameful colonial system, which has caused the majority of the world’s peoples so much suffering and hardship, is living through its last days. The deplorable events in the Congo show that the colonial Powers are doing their utmost to regain the positions they have lost, but no intrigues and no force can stop the irresistible historical process of the colonial peoples’liberation.
18. The Government of the People’s Republic of Albania fully agrees with the Soviet Government that the time has come to bring up the question of the complete and final elimination of the colonial regime in all its forms. There is no doubt that the United Nations can exercise a very great influence in the fulfilment of this historic task. Our delegation has great satisfaction in supporting the declaration, on the grant of independence to colonial countries and peoples, [A/4502] submitted by the Soviet delegation, and considers that the adoption of this declaration by the General Assembly will promote the cause of freedom and progress for the peoples, as well as that of universal peace.
19. In connexion with this question, I would like to say that we not only regret but object strongly to the fact that the United Nations has been used against the independence, sovereignty and national unity of the Republic of the Congo because the Secretary-General has taken the side of the colonialists and not that of the rightful cause of the Congolese people and of its legitimate Government. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Albania endorses the opinion expressed by Mr. Khrushchev in his speech [869th meeting], concerning the Secretary-General’s activity and that of his staff, and supports the proposal that the post of Secretary-General be replaced by a collective body. We also agree with the Soviet proposal that the question of the location of the United Nations Headquarters be reviewed, since it is known that the United States Government not only does not bother to create favourable conditions of work for the delegations of participating countries but has even imposed, on many delegations, intolerable restrictions and discriminatory measures incompatible with the spirit and principles of the United Nations Charter.
20.	The People’s Republic of Albania is firmly convinced that the cause of peace will triumph, since the forces of peace are now stronger than the forces of war. We consider than peace can be maintained and strengthened if all peoples are always on their guard against aggressors, uniting their efforts in the struggle to maintain peace and defending it to the last. We are certain that, if the Member States make a common effort, the United Nations can play an important role in preserving peace and international security.
21.	Fifteen years have passed since the end of the Second World War, but the German problem has still not been solved. If it is not solved by peaceful means, this problem will constitute a serious threat to world peace. We consider the conclusion of a peace treaty would put an end to this dangerous legacy of the Second World War and would at the same time, settle the question, of West Berlin and lead to the strengthening of peace and security in Europe and throughout the world.
22.	The Government of the People’s Republic of Albania considers that disarmament is now the most vital problem for the whole of mankind and for the maintenance of peace. Our Government has always advocated, and continues to advocate, general and complete disarmament.
23.	The Albanian people is well acquainted with the horrors of war, since foreign invaders forced it to hack out its path through the gloom of centuries, sword in hand. The Albanian people was, in 1939, the first victim of Italian fascist aggression in Europe, It met the Italian occupation with weapons in its hand, and did not cease its national-liberation struggle until the country had completely liberated itself and won its freedom. Although the Albanian people numbered little more than a million in the Second World War, it rose up as. one man in the fight against the nazi and fascist invaders, forming far behind the lines of the Italian and German occupying forces, a strong national-liberation army of 70,000 partisans organized in shock brigades and divisions and fighting with weapons seized from the occupying forces in the course of the struggle. About 8 per cent of our country’s population died on the field of battle, or were wounded or thrown into prison; 35 per cent of the towns and villages were razed to the ground; one third of the livestock was destroyed; and the entire national economy was ruined. But at last, thanks to the shedding of its blood, to the great patriotic war waged by the Soviet Union against the Hitlerite army, and to the war fought by the Allies of those days, the Albanian people won its freedom and is now building s, new and happy life. It knows war very well and therefore hates it, and is putting forth all its efforts to build a peaceful life and to preserve peace. The Albanian people hates war not from any fear of war. It fears nothing. It stands and will always stand for peace, but if anyone dares to encroach upon its freedom, he should know that the Albanian people is not in the habit of bowing down to anyone and is capable of defending that freedom.
24.	General and complete disarmament is the most ardent desire of all peoples. During the fifteen years since the war, not only has no progress at all been made in this direction, but the arms race has been continuing at a rapid speed; the endless disarmament negotiations have so far yielded no results; while numerous proposals and steps in the right direction on the part of the Soviet Union and other peace-loving countries, in the field of disarmament, have met with not the slightest response from the Western Powers.
25.	The well-known proposals of the Soviet Government on general and complete disarmament constituted an event of historic importance. Our Government has supported and continues to support all the Soviet Union’s proposals in regard to general and complete disarmament, and considers that they represent the only sound line to follow for the maintenance of a lasting peace.
26.	It is well known that, in its resolution of 20 November 1959, [1378 (XIV)] the General Assembly unanimously approved the principle of general and complete disarmament and recommended that an appropriate agreement should be concluded as soon as possible.
27.	Whereas the Soviet Union showed its good will by unilaterally reducing its armed forces by one third, the Council of NATO decided to increase the armed forces of its member states, the United States of America increased its military budget, the militarization of West Germany took on threatening proportions, and the United States committed acts of gross provocation against socialist countries. The work of the Ten-Nation Committee on Disarmament yielded no results, despite the constant efforts of the socialist countries’ delegations to come to an agreement with those of the Western countries.
28.	It is known that, in an effort to reach agreement and to solve the disarmament problem, the Soviet Government on 2 June 1960 put forward an amended programme of general and complete disarmament, [A/4374] in which account was taken of many of the observations made by the Western Powers in regard to the previous Soviet proposals. But when the Soviet Union accepted some of the proposals of the Western Powers, the latter repudiated their own proposals. Thus the Western Powers showed once more, by their attitude, that they were really against general and complete disarmament. The socialist countries represented on the Ten-Nation Committee were forced to leave that Committee, so as not to enable the Western Powers to use endless negotiations in the Committee as a screen to cover their designs against the cause of peace. It is the Western Powers who are responsible for the failure of the Committee’s negotiations.
29.	At the proposal of the Soviet Government, the question of general and complete disarmament is again to be discussed at this session of the General Assembly. Speaking before the Assembly on 23 September 1960 [869th meeting], the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, Mr. Khrushchev, again stressed the Soviet Government’s firm resolve to continue in its efforts to achieve general and complete disarmament, which is the great desire of all the peoples. He then submitted,' for consideration by the General Assembly, the Soviet Government’s declaration on the question of disarmament [A/4503], and also another document: “Basic provisions of a treaty on general and complete disarmament” [A/4505]. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Albania regards these proposals of the Soviet Government as new steps forward and as important and constructive efforts towards the solution of this vital problem; and it declares its support of these very positive measures.
30.	Reserving the right to express itself in detail on this basic item at this session, our delegation hopes that the General Assembly will find within itself the Strength to take positive steps towards the preparation of an agreement on general and complete disarmament, with the new Soviet proposals as a basis.
31.	The Albanian Government wishes to emphasize that one of the main organic defects in the disarmament talks has been, and remains, the absence from them of the People’s Republic of China. The People’s Republic of China is the country with the largest population in the world; it is a mighty but peaceable State. It is difficult to imagine an effective solution of the vital problem of disarmament without the participation of the Peopled Republic of China — for that country is still outside the United Nations and, as is well known, has quite legitimately declared that it will not regard itself as bound by any international agreements on disarmament, or on other matters, which are reached without its official participation and have not been signed by its official representatives.
32.	The question of restoring the lawful rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations has become an urgent one, affecting peace and the interests of the United Nations itself. The United Nations cannot be regarded as a universal organization, capable of solving major international problems, unless the People’s Republic of China belongs to it. We consider that it is time to put an end to this abnormal situation and expel the Chiang Kai-shek puppet who is occupying great China’s place here at the wish of the United States Government, and that the General Assembly should, override the absurd obstinacy of the United States Government on this point and invite the true representatives of the great and peaceable Chinese people to take the place which belongs to them in this Organization. The Albanian Government fully supports the Soviet Government’s proposal [A/4474] for the inclusion, in the agenda of the fifteenth session of the General Assembly, of the question of admitting the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations.
33.	The People’s Republic of China has become a most important factor for peace and progress in Asia and throughout the world. The banner of socialism has been raised in China at the cost of blood shed by the great Chinese people, and that banner will never be torn down. In the ten years which have passed since its liberation, the People’s Republic of China has increased its industrial production twelve-fold and its agricultural production by two and a half times; it is successfully bringing about a cultural and technical revolution, and is steadily improving the material condition of this multimillion-strong people.
34.	The United States is illegitimately occupying Taiwan and other islands in that area which are Chinese territory and belong to the People’s Republic of China. It is therefore no accident that international reaction has been inventing the most absurd, fantastic and slanderous fabrications and "theories”, accusing the People’s Republic of China of desiring war rather than peace. The People’s Republic of China is in the forefront of the struggle for peace and peaceful coexistence; it resolutely advocates disarmament and the lessening of international tension.
35.	At a time when the United Nations is quite properly admitting all the countries which have just obtained their freedom and national independence, the Albanian Government considers that it would be entirely appropriate for the Mongolian People’s Republic, which requested admission to membership long ago and is known as a thoroughly peaceable and democratic State , to take its rightful place in the United Nations.
36.	The Albanian people and its Government are determined to devote all their energies to the development of Albania’s economy and culture, to the steady improvement of this nation’s level of living, and to the strengthening of peace and friendship between the peoples. Our foreign policy is based on eternal friendship and unity with the countries of the socialist camp, and on friendly and peaceful relations with other countries, on the principle of peaceful coexistence between States with different social systems.
37.	Sixteen years ago, when it freed itself from nazi and facist occupation, Albania was a backward agrarian country; it was not industrialized, and its agriculture was primitive; 85 per cent of the population were illiterate, and the country was strewn with the ruins of the six-year-long war. Under feudalism and imperialism, the people had been condemned to poverty and darkness. The national revolution made our people the true masters of their country, made it free, and opened up the way to unlimited development. The volume of industrial output is now twenty-four times greater that it was in 1938, and that of agriculture production has doubled. Albania is now a partly industrialized agrarian country, and is already on the way to becoming no less industrialized than agrarian. We have eliminated illiteracy, and every fifth person is now engaged in study. We have our own new university and a widespread network of schools at all levels. We have set up a whole system of medical institutions, where every citizen can obtain free treatment. Prices of consumer goods have not risen; on the contrary, they are steadily falling. The taxation of the population has also been consistently decreasing; in the State Budget it now accounts for only 2 per cent of the total revenue; and the people’s level of living is continually rising.
38.	Socialism has made Albania progressive, strong and inviolable. The hostile policy and the innumerable provocations and intrigues of American imperialism and its friends, designed to overthrow the people’s power and deprive the Albanian people of its historic achievements, have, and always will, come to nought.
39.	Our country lies in the Balkans — an area which in the past, because of the conflicting interests of various imperialist Powers, has often been the scene of bloody battles that have cost the Balkan peoples very dear. Every effort is now being made by the People’s Republic of Albania, together with the Soviet Union and also the People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the Romanian People’s Republic, to convert the Balkans and the Adriatic region into an area of peace and fruitful co-operation, into an element of stability and peace in Europe. This purpose is being served by the initiative which has been taken towards transforming the Balkans and the Adriatic region into a zone free from atomic or rocket weapons, and also by our efforts to establish good-neighbourly relations with adjacent States. It is not our fault if these efforts, and the proposals which we have repeatedly made, have not always found a response among our neighbours.
40.	The Albanian Government stresses once again that the establishment of atomic and rocket weapon bases in Italy and Greece, which are Albania’s immediate neighbours, constitutes a direct threat to Albania and the other people’s democracies in the Balkans.
41.	The Albanian Government considers that the States of the Balkan and Adriatic zone can and must .find a way to agree among themselves with regard to improving their mutual relations on the basis of equal rights, non-intervention, mutual respect and mutual (advantage, and according to the principle of peaceful coexistence,, The Albanian Government is ready to negotiate with the Greek Government for the establishment of normal relations between these two neighbour countries, Albania and Greece, but only subject to full equality of rights and the exclusion of political or territorial claims at each other’s expense.
42.	The Government of the People’s Republic of Albania is developing friendly economic and cultural relations with the Arab countries, to which the Albanian people is linked by traditional ties of friendship, and also with many countries of Europe, Africa and Asia. We again confirm our readiness to establish normal relations with all States which wish to have such relations with us, including the United States and the United Kingdom.
43.	In our relations with every State, we adhere firmly to the principle of non-interference in domestic affairs. We never have interfered and never shall interfere in the domestic affairs of other countries. But we do not want, and will never allow, other States to interfere in our own internal affairs.
44.	There are on the agenda of this General Assembly session a number of questions, the solution of which by the United Nations would greatly promote the cause of peace. The Albanian delegation intends to take part in the examination of these questions and contribute to their settlement.	.
45.	However, we cannot but express regret at the efforts, the danger of which we must indicate, to insist on including in the agenda of this session such absurdities as the "questions” of Hungary and Tibet, which have no foundation and represent gross and inadmissible interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States, in clear contradiction with the provisions of the Charter. The provocative nature of these attempts is obvious. They are designed to poison the atmosphere of the General Assembly’s work. The Albanian delegation strongly condemns these insidious manoeuvres.
46.	In conclusion, I should like to express the confidence of the Albanian people, and of the Albanian Government which I have the honour to head, that the noble cause for which the United Nations was created — peace and co-operation between the peoples — will ultimately triumph, and that the United Nations will increasingly deserve the trust of every people.
