I wish first of all to extend to you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Italian Government and myself, our heartiest congratulations on your election as President of this Assembly. My congratulating you on your election to the highest office in the United Nations is the more gratifying for me inasmuch as your outstanding talents as a diplomat are well known, and highly appreciated in my country. Just as universally known and highly regarded are the skill and ability with which you have always handled the tasks entrusted to you by the United Nations, It is my desire to add my most fervent wish for complete success in your endeavour, which is always laden with great responsibility and which this year appears particularly delicate.
30.	The Italian Government recognizes the authority of this highest international body and to this authority, at once political and moral, it has always bowed, in the belief that the relationships among States should also function in accordance with the democratic principles of equality and liberty, and in compliance with the law governing international relations.
31.	The removal of all forms of violence from the relationships among peoples, and their peaceful evolution — in adherence to the continual change in international needs stemming from the ceaseless advancement of mankind — have been enhanced, this past year, through the peaceful achievement of independence by many new States which, in full agreement with the countries to which they were bound by anachronistic ties, were able to equip themselves with modern institutions more adequate to cope with present necessities.
32.	The Italian Government has been happy to give prompt recognition to all new States emerging from concrete compliance with the principles of equality and liberty. It has likewise been happy to express its ready agreement to the admission of all these countries to our Organization. I wish to express to them at this point and on this occasion, in the name of the Italian Government and people, the warmest felicitations on the attainment of their independence, our most fervent wishes for their future, and a most cordial and friendly welcome to the United Nations. At the same time, let me voice our highest appreciation for the observance of international law shown by them, together with the States with which they freely negotiated their independence.
33.	All of us must be deeply grateful for these major felicitous occurrences in the international arena, as they have shown mankind the immense benefits that can be derived from mutual comprehension and from the substitution of the democratic method of respect for the popular will for the method of force or, worse still, violence.
34.	May I be allowed to recall that Italy has already given concrete proof of its disinterested and confident good will towards the peoples on their way to emancipation, and of its ready desire to aid them even by participating in the burdens involved, by enabling Somalia to achieve its independence five months in advance of the date scheduled by this Organization.
35.	The ten years of Italian trusteeship administration of Somalia, which passed in an atmosphere of great friendship and co-operation, came to an end on 1 July 1960, in conformity with a proposal advanced by the Italian Government to that effect, rather than on 2 December 1960, the time-limit which had been set for the trusteeship mandate at the time it was given to my country. The advancement of the time-limit is a proof of the understanding and concern of Italy towards the peoples desirous of setting themselves up as free and independent States.
36.	Together with a particular greeting, I wish to extend my special praise to Somalia — to its people and its political figures — for having co-operated with great intelligence and profound wisdom in the achievement of the targets of the trusteeship administration to the full satisfaction of all parties concerned.
37.	Unfortunately, not all peoples yearning for independence and for the determination of their own destiny have understood to the same extent the superiority of the democratic method. This is why we still witness today, to our grief and consternation, acute strife among opposing contestants who fight for the right to impose by violence their own particular concept of international relationships rather than comply with the will of the majority, as freely determined on the basis of the principles of the equality of all citizens, and then resort to the system of international negotiations.
38.	I intend to dwell, in particular, on the Congo situation, which has recently concerned all of us deeply and to which both the Security Council and this very Assembly have had to devote a great deal of their activity, the latter having been convened in special session on the eve of the present regular session.
39.	The clouds which gathered over that country early in July have not yet cleared. Italy's participation in the painful events in the Congo has been, and still is, very active and is prompted by a sincere, solicitous and friendly sympathy for the fate of this young nation, to which I express my most heartfelt wish that it will be able soon to enjoy again the benefits of a productive and fruitful peace.
40.	To this end, the Secretary-General, in conformity with the decisions taken by the appropriate organs of the United Nations and in difficult and complex circumstances, has already fulfilled his task effectively and fruitfully, and in this connexion I feel duty bound to reaffirm here my Government's highest and most cordial appreciation.
41.	In the introduction to his annual report [A/4390/ Add.l], the Secretary-General portrays a picture, with which we thoroughly agree, of the tasks that the United Nations has been called upon to perform in the Congo. He outlines the history of a great initiative of international scope, to the success of which we all must contribute if we really mean to serve the cause of peace and co-operation.
42.	Actually, the assistance that our Organization decided to give to the Congo has as its sole purpose to bring about peace and co-operation. It is, therefore, difficult to understand how it may have been possible for someone to attribute different aims to it.
43.	The United Nations has already decided to continue the action which it has undertaken with absolute impartiality and complete disinterestedness for the sole purpose of restoring law and order, bringing back stability where uncertainty seemed to prevail, and warding off the dangers of war which seemed to hover over this tormented nation. These are, substantially, the purposes unequivocally stressed in the resolution adopted at the special session of the General Assembly on 20 September 1960 [1474 (ES-IV)] to which the Italian Government reaffirms its full support.
44.	I have chosen to emphasize the Secretary-General's prompt, active and imaginative activity in this connexion. But above all, I wish to pay tribute to the awareness and to the farsighted concern shown by him on this occasion and in similar circumstances for the destiny of our Organization. The Secretary-General was not selected as the representative of the Western democracies, the communist world, or the neutral countries. He was selected, in the spirit of the Charter, for the personal qualities which he has shown that he possesses in a high degree and which reflect complete honesty and impartiality of intention as well as dedication to the cause of the United Nations. I believe also that the actual set-up and the machinery of the Secretariat should not be altered, because they have proved to be efficient.
45.	Being the host country to the United Nations is not a privilege, but rather a responsibility. The United States has shown itself fully aware of and deserving the responsibility of being the host country to the United Nations. The most appropriate reply that can be given to the criticisms that have been voiced in this hail is that the United States has the shortcomings of its own virtues inasmuch as the inconveniences experienced by certain representatives are those inherent in that very freedom prevailing in our host country. And none of us is willing to forego the advantages of freedom in order to eliminate these inconveniences. In sum, Italy can find no reason whatsoever to modify a situation that meets the requirements of the moment.
46.	In the first months of this year there was much discussion about "detente", peaceful coexistence and disarmament. Actually, it is true that the very concept of peaceful coexistence seemed from the beginning to imply a mental reservation in certain minds, a reservation about complete international co-operation. This reservation notwithstanding, substantial efforts were made in order to bring about an effective "détente”. Unfortunately, the hopes that all peace-loving peoples had rested on the new trend in the relations among States were dashed by the complete collapse of the Summit Conference. This collapse had its negative repercussions also in the field of disarmament. At the end of the fourteenth session of the General Assembly, it seemed warranted to entertain well-founded hopes that the disarmament problem might finally be heading, after so many years of fruitless attempts, towards the solutions that all peoples are earnestly wishing for and looking forward to. Besides the improvement of the general political atmosphere and the unanimous vote of this Assembly on resolution 1378 (XIV), there was a positive factor in the agreement for the institution of a special committee, the Ten-Nation Committee on Disarmament entrusted with the task of resuming, after a two-year interruption, the negotiations on disarmament. With the creation of this Committee, in which Italy was called upon to participate, the Western side accepted the Soviet desire for parity, still keeping the negotiations within a relatively restricted organ which provided all the necessary guarantees for such technical as well as political negotiations.
47.	A very severe judgement was pronounced by Chairman Khrushchev on the Conference of the Ten- Nation Committee, particularly on the intentions of the Western Powers participating in it. I cannot accept the charges that he has levelled at the Western countries and their alleged sabotage schemes. Further, if what has been accomplished in Geneva is observed closely and objectively, a completely negative appraisal does not appear warranted. Unfortunately, as is well known, no agreements were reached there. Nevertheless I believe that useful work was done in the way of investigation and comparison of the theses presented, and that certain efforts were made towards reciprocal understanding and clarification, praiseworthy in themselves.
48.	Mr. Khrushchev, on the other hand, in his speech of 23 September, implicitly admitted that the work in Geneva was not totally fruitless. In fact, he stated that: "... the new Soviet, proposal ... has been drawn up with due regard for all the useful points which were made during the past year in the course of the discussion of this question by political and public circles of various countries of the world." [869th meeting, para. 242.] He did not mention the Conference at Geneva. However, since the disarmament negotiations have been interrupted for two years, he could not but refer also to the work of the Ten-Nation Committee, notwithstanding his negative remarks on it. On the other hand, in the same speech, he stated: "An identical point of view has materialized in our proposals as well as in those making up the NATO military alignment regarding the necessity to follow up agreement on disarmament with the creation of armed forces of all countries under international control to be used by the United Nations as decided by the Security Council." [Ibid., para. 279.]
49.	One might wonder why the Conference, so suddenly interrupted, has not yet led to any precise agreements of a general character. It is impossible to go into detail in this brief account and, on the other hand, I would like to avoid fruitless polemic overtones. I believe, however, that some positive results could actually have been achieved at Geneva if certain recurrent propaganda attitudes had been avoided on the Soviet side and if there had prevailed a unanimous awareness of the difficulties inherent in disarmament and of the need for its gradual implementation.
50.	There is no doubt that a general and complete disarmament under effective international supervision was, and still is, the target towards which the Governments represented in this Assembly have pledged themselves to proceed with utmost earnestness and urgency. On my part, I want to state only that the Italian Government is firmly convinced that we should proceed in that direction.
51.	But it is my opinion that we should approach the problem with full awareness of its immense difficulties and that we should not confine ourselves to a programme of "all or nothing". We should also be ready to accept with gratification partial results, on the following two conditions: first, that they meet the basic requirements of disarmament which have been so often stated and on which everyone seems to concur, at least theoretically, in particular that, through the implementation of such partial measures, the mutual security of each and all be enhanced, and not diminished; and, secondly, such results should constitute not final goals, but intermediate targets intended to ensure the quickest advancement towards the ultimate aim. Furthermore, in our evaluation of the over-all programme, we must take into account the fact that there is a wide gap in conventional forces between East and West and that nuclear disarmament, while auspicious in itself, involves the concurrent establishment of a balance in conventional forces.
52.	In fact, any person who is honest and of good will cannot help but recognize that even one initial step, one early agreement on the road to general and complete disarmament, would represent an invaluable success not only in itself but also for its favourable moral and psychological effects. It would also constitute a precious initial factor in decreasing the mistrust between East and West and in facilitating the solution of the political problems which are at the root of the armaments race. That must encourage us to resume our work with faith, goodwill and perseverance.
53.	Several times at the Geneva Conference Italy made the suggestion that efforts at negotiations be concentrated, at an early stage, on that part of the plans and on those problems in which some gearing of positions or greater mutual -understanding was beginning to be seen, in order to achieve at least some immediate practical results. Naturally, I am fully aware that partial solutions, even if looked upon as initial measures to be further broadened, are always difficult and that all problems are inevitably interwoven. Yet, I believe that it pays to experiment with that approach, keeping in our minds a clear vision of the lofty goal we are striving for. It seems to me that Marshal Tito included some remarks to that effect in his recent statement [868th meeting].
54.	At this time, a great responsibility rests with the Assembly-giving new impetus to the negotiations on disarmament. The Assembly must assist the major responsible parties with its advice and recommendations in their dealings, and it must encourage them to resume this all-important conversation. I do not doubt that the will of the people, which is expressed through the enlightened advice of your delegations, will point out clearly the wisest, the most constructive and the most practicable course in order that this fundamental work should be resumed immediately and completed successfully.
55.	The support and guidance of the Assembly are necessary now and in the future. I believe that in the future it will be convenient to bring the United Nations into even closer contact with the negotiations in order that the Organization, particularly the Assembly, may gradually be in a better position to follow closely the development of the dealings which must, owing to their technical aspects, remain entrusted to a rather restricted body. For instance, the negotiating organ might send to the United Nations Disarmament Commission periodic reports at intervals established in advance by the Assembly. At the United Nations all States must be in a position to know and to evaluate, even better than in the past, the responsibilities, both negative and positive, resting with each negotiator in the performance of his tasks. We favour such supervision and look forward to this judgement with serenity.
56.	Recently the Assembly heard a statement by the President of the United States [868th meeting] which calls for meditation on the part of all of us. It was a speech full of common sense and imbued with a conciliatory spirit which opened the door to concrete measures of disarmament. But as Mr. Diefenbaker, Prime Minister of Canada, correctly said [871st meeting] Mr. Khrushchev has tried to close that door, thus frustrating our hopes. Mr. Diefenbaker also introduced a series of proposals on disarmament worthy of the highest consideration and the closest examination. What is needed is the earnest desire to arrive at an understanding. For our part, we are ready to make our contribution in a constructive spirit. We should be equally willing to consider the modalities for future negotiations which may allow a more fruitful work to develop.
57.	The spirit which has so far led Italy to pursue these negotiations with the utmost sincerity has often been solemnly reaffirmed. It is the spirit which corresponds to Italy’s ideals of peace, international cooperation, mutual assistance among nations; it is also a spirit of realistic trust in the soundness of the cause. This spirit shall never fail; in fact it shall be exerted with ever-growing vigour in the negotiations which we feel should be resumed as soon as possible. Similarly, in the framework of the initiatives that must be undertaken by our Organization in order that its activities may conform to the developments of modern techniques and to the great strides of human progress, I cannot fail to mention the need to reconsider, within the United Nations, the problems relating to the peaceful uses of outer space. May I be allowed to note that a long time has elapsed since it was decided, [resolution 1472 (XIV)] to establish a Committee entrusted with the study of the technical and legal aspects of the question. The Italian Government would be gratified to witness an early beginning of the Committee’s work.
58.	Italy is convinced that the key to peace lies not only in disarmament, but also in getting the problem of the under-developed countries started towards a solution, for that is the threshold which civilization will cross in the next decades. We hold that the course taken and the means used so far to this end are neither adequate nor sufficient. Aid to under-developed countries cannot be conceived as help aimed solely at the development of production, but also at the development of human relations no longer founded on a power scale, but rather on a sense of a common solidarity — and not a merely material one — to prevail within the States as well as in international life.
59.	It is necessary that the more fortunate peoples should feel the greatness of this task which presupposes that the differences in political and economic power ought to be forgotten in order to operate on a plane of human solidarity among peoples who feel that they are on the same level of dignity. The means so far employed for this aid have been inadequate; it is necessary to exert every effort to match them more closely to the dire needs of reality, not vice versa, after having set up a concrete programme based on suitable investigations. Therefore, the need is felt for an organization with the task of studying and carrying out a programme. However, an organization willing to assist all of the under-developed countries of the world would run the risk of stopping short in the face of the gigantic tasks beyond the possibilities of any such arrangement.
60.	It is necessary, on the contrary, in Italy's view, to rely as much as possible on regional organizations. Effective arrangements of this type are already in existence within the framework of the United Nations. We hold that all the States willing to co-operate in the implementation of such a programme, both on the giving and the receiving ends, will in the future be able to perform their constructive work through suitable ties among their regional organizations on a basis of reciprocal trust and understanding of the means and needs of each one. The possibilities for concrete action will thus become greater. For the benefit of the under-developed countries, the United Nations should, wherever possible, check on the methods and the objectives for the promotion and implementation of such a programme. This is for the United Nations a task which alone would justify its existence and actions.
61.	I trust that under the aegis of the United Nations the ground-work will be laid for the formation of aggregations of States which can operate jointly in restricted and well determined areas so that a concrete, planned action may be carried toward successful completion.
62.	As far as United Nations action in favour of the under-developed countries is concerned, I am gratified to announce that the Italian Government, subject to parliamentary approval, has decided to double Italy's contribution to the Special Fund and to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance. Italy's quota for both agencies will thus be increased to $2.25 million starting in the next fiscal year. This will be in proportion to our quota for the ordinary budget of the United Nations. The Italian Government’s decision is in keeping with the wishes expressed in several resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, emphasizing time and again the urgent need to make available at least $100 million yearly to the United Nations, in order that it may be enabled to expand its technical assistance programmes.
63.	In addition to the consideration of the great problems of world-wide scope which this high forum has to debate and to which I have already referred, I cannot refrain from saying a few words on a matter which the Assembly might have been spared and which Italy is now called upon to discuss, namely, the Alto Adige question.
64.	Italy has nothing to fear from this discussion, and on its own initiative proposed to Austria that there be recourse, by mutual consent, to that organ of the United Nations which is competent in matters pertaining to the implementation of treaties, namely, the International Court of Justice.
65.	Unfortunately, the Austrian Government chose to dramatize a question that presents itself in extremely simple and clear terms and decided to put it before the General Assembly. We did not oppose this, even though we had to ask for the rectification of the heading of the item which is now included in the agenda.
66.	The Italian Government, while gratified to be able to point to the steps taken so far to strengthen the democratic way of life in the territories of Alto Adige, wishes to stress its firm commitment to a wholehearted implementation of the de Gasperi-Gruber Agreement concluded in Paris in 1946, which allowed the German-speaking minorities to develop their economy successfully, to safeguard their institutions and to enrich their cultural traditions.
67.	Only in 1956 Austria advanced a few complaints of a general character on the implementation of the de Gasperi-Gruber agreement, and it was Italy which invited Austria, in July of that same year, to specify its demands. Negotiations ensued through diplomatic channels as a consequence of which, in may capacity as Prime Minister, I invited the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Austria to negotiations at the highest level, convinced, as I was, that direct dealings in a spirit of good will could lead to a solution of the dispute. The same invitation was extended later by my successor as Prime Minister, who also proposed to Austria recourse, by mutual consent, to the International Court of Justice on the matter. The Austrian Government preferred not to accept the two-fold invitation, and decided to bring the question before the Assembly.
68.	 Having said that, however, I must point out that, as this is only a matter of implementing a freely stipulated agreement, the Italian Government will have no choice but to oppose any attempt to drag on to a political ground a question that the parties, given good will on both sides, would certainly be able to settle by other means in the very framework of the principles of the United Nations Charter.
69.	It is a characteristic of all free assemblies to gather diverse and often differing opinions. This must neither discourage nor hold us back. I believe that the work of the present session, which is in many respects more important than previous ones, could be fruitful if everyone were to be pervaded with the spirit of justice and equanimity which should govern relations among the peoples.
