Mr. President, I wish to tender, on behalf of the Japanese delegation, our sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency of the fifteenth session of the General Assembly. I believe that your wisdom and discretion, combined with ample experience in the League of Nations and in the United Nations, will successfully guide this important session of the General Assembly. I am delighted to have with us the delegations from the many newly independent countries. I am confident that they will not fail to follow the path of prosperity and progress. I have no doubt that they will, as Member States of the United Nations, fully perform their important functions in the interest of world peace and freedom.
171.	On behalf of the Japanese Government, I wish to assure the Assembly of my country’s unwavering support of this world organ. Today, when the importance of the United Nations is growing greater than ever for the peace of the world, it is, we believe, the paramount responsibility on the part of all Member States to co-operate in the strengthening of its functions and in the enhancement of its authority and prestige. And it is in this belief that Japan participates in the activities of the United Nations.
172.	I wish to clarify the views of the Japanese Government regarding the various important questions which now confront the General Assembly, with special reference to those concerning Africa, the relaxation of international tension, disarmament, and the economic development of the newly developing countries,
173.	In the past fifteen years since its establishment, the United Nations has already undergone a number of trials, such as the Korean War and the Suez Canal affair. And, on each occasion it has succeeded in fortifying and expanding its functions for the preservation of peace. Today, it faces a new test in the Congo question. How the question is dealt with concerns not only the Congo, but also the entire continent of Africa. Indeed, it is already linked to the very maintenance of world peace. The United Nations cannot afford to fail in this vital task.
174.	The Japanese delegation is highly gratified with the success of the United Nations activities in coping with the initial disturbances and with its efforts in restoring order. What would have happened if the United Nations had not existed to take prompt and effective measures? By this single instance alone the United Nations has, we believe, amply demonstrated its "raison d’être” as an indispensable organ for peace. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General who has organized this campaign of peace, and who is now assured of the support of an overwhelming majority of the Member States.
175.	However, the task of solving the Congo question has only begun. Its final settlement will depend largely on the future activities of the United Nations and the co-operation of all its Member States. I fully subscribe to the view clearly set forth in the resolution adopted by the Assembly at its fourth emergency special session [1474 (ES-IV)] that any outside aid to the Congo must be extended by the United Nations, and only through the United Nations. This is desirable and necessary in order to keep the aid free of political influences, as well as to sustain the authority of the United Nations. Japan earnestly hopes that effective assistance thus rendered will speedily accomplish its purpose.
176.	Our task, however, does not stop with the Congo. The advent of independent nations in Africa one after another demands a reappraisal of the whole situation. In order to help these new countries to consolidate peacefully their independence and to achieve prosperity, it would be necessary for the United Nations to give serious consideration to the relationships among the nations at different stages of development. In this regard, our delegation would like to call the attention of the Assembly to the principle of racial equality which Japan lias consistently advocated ever since the signing of the Versailles Treaty. To translate this principle of racial equality into practice is one of the major aims of the United Nations, as is clearly set forth in the Charter. It is an indispensable condition for enabling all nations to join hands, each as an equal member of the world community,
177.	I hope all Member States will redouble their efforts for the realization of this principle. Only by so doing can the relation between the new independent nations and the countries which had formerly administered them be amicably adjusted, on the basis of equality and mutual respect.
178.	Furthermore, the United Nations membership, with the admission of new States, has now been nearly doubled. This fact, I believe, should be reflected in its organizational make-up, I consider it urgent to increase the membership of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council, especially the latter.
179.	Next, I wish to turn to the need for easing East-West tensions, which is another important question that demands the attention of this Assembly. Last spring the entire world had pinned all its hopes on the Summit Conference, but to its great disappointment it was abruptly called off. Since then the cold war has gone on unabated. In order to ease international tensions, it is necessary, first of all, that all nations, including the big Powers, not merely preach peace but demonstrate in action their devotion to its cause by creating a climate for friendly East-West talks. They should strictly refrain from interference in the internal affairs of other countries or acts of intimidation or fanning the flame of distrust and hatred between nations. In the case of an international dispute which cannot be settled by negotiation, the parties concerned should refrain from taking any arbitrary action but should seek a peaceful settlement through the United Nations.
180.	I sincerely hope that the current session of the General Assembly will not be turned into an arena of verbal clashes, acrid oratory and propaganda performances, but serve as a forum for constructive discussions and thereby promote a friendly atmosphere for East-West negotiations.
181.	In this connexion, the Japanese delegation wishes to stress the need for speeding the disarmament negotiations. The frightful development of modern weapons, especially weapons of mass destruction, and their means of delivery through outer space, threatens the total destruction of mankind and civilization. It also makes the very task of control and inspection for the reduction or abolition of these weapons technically more and more complicated and difficult. In other words, the more the development of weapons advances, the more the disarmament negotiations will become difficult. Should we fail in our efforts to push forward disarmament negotiations without delay, mankind might be plunged into a dire catastrophe.
182.	It is most regrettable that the Conference of the Ten-Nation Committee on Disarmament has been suspended without achieving any concrete results. A disarmament conference is not a place for propaganda. There is no time to be lost in carrying out realistic negotiations on concrete disarmament programmes, hi order that the Ten-Nation Committee may not repeat the fruitless efforts of the past and proceed with discussions which reflect the will of the General Assembly, the Japanese delegation submits that the Assembly should furnish the Committee with appropriate guidance so as to facilitate the attainment of the ultimate objective of general and complete disarmament.
183.	Last year the General Assembly expressed the unanimous hope that "measures leading towards the goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control will be worked out in detail and agreed upon in the shortest possible time" [resolution 1378 (XIV)]. This was significant in that it indicated the goal of disarmament. The Japanese delegation considers that a realistic and constructive approach is to start first with the implementation of disarmament measures which are at present controllable and feasible, and thereby restore confidence among nations; and then to proceed with expansion of the scope of disarmament. It is sometimes contended that a treaty covering the whole process of complete disarmament should be signed before inspection arrangements are worked out. This cannot be considered as realistic.
184.	It is well known that the Japanese people, from its own experience, has deep concern for the suspension of nuclear tests. Therefore, the Japanese Government and people earnestly desire an early conclusion of an agreement on nuclear test suspension, which will pave the way for speeding general disarmament.
185.	Japan appreciates the patient endeavours of the United States, the United kingdom and the Soviet Union, which are continuing negotiations at the Conference for the Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapons Tests in Geneva, and it is gratified to see that the voluntary suspension of tests is being kept up even now by the negotiating Powers. However, since this voluntary suspension is without control and inspection, the present situation is insecure and fraught with danger. I hope that the Powers concerned will exert further efforts towards an early conclusion of an agreement on the suspension of nuclear tests.
186.	With regard to the prevention of the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons, the General Assembly at its fourteenth session recognized that "the danger now exists that an increase in the number of States possessing nuclear weapons may occur, aggravating international tension and the difficulty of maintaining world peace, and thus rendering more difficult the attainment of general disarmament agreement" [resolution 1380 (XIV)]. In order to avoid such a danger, the conclusion of an agreement on nuclear tests suspension is urgently needed.
187.	I wish to invite the attention of the Assembly to the fact that despite the voluntary discontinuance of nuclear tests over a fairly prolonged period, the need for a fundamental solution of the question of nuclear tests suspension is growing more urgent than ever.
188.	Before leaving the subject of disarmament, I wish to refer briefly to the problem of the peaceful uses of outer space. The lively space activities of these days arouse both hopes and fears for the future of mankind. I should like to stress the need for a speedy international agreement on the prohibition of military uses of outer space so that mankind may live in those hopes free from those fears. There is also need of international co-operation in order that the peaceful use of outer space may be promoted under the principle of open and orderly conduct for the welfare of all of mankind.
189.	In this respect, the Antarctic Treaty concluded last year among the nations concerned should serve as an excellent precedent, indicating the direction our endeavours should follow. I hope that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space set up at the fourteenth session of the General Assembly will promptly begin its activities, for which I promise Japan's co-operation.
190.	I wish to touch upon the necessity of further reinforcement of United Nations activities in the economic and social fields.
191.	Among the advanced nations of the world, the goal of their economic policy was until recently the attainment of full employment. Now they have advanced a step further. Their new goal is set at the maintenance of economic growth without inflation. On the other hand, most countries of the world are still in a stage far behind the target of full employment. They are faced with the serious problems of how to clothe, feed and shelter their rapidly increasing population. These countries, as long as they rely solely on the production of primary commodities, will not be able to escape the adverse effects of economic fluctuations in the advanced countries, and, as in the case of the 1957-1958 recession, they will have to put up with the widening of the gap in living standards between them and the advanced nations.
192.	The Secretary-General, in his statement addressed to the thirtieth session of the Economic and Social Council, referred to the significance of international division of labour in terms of dynamic gains. The newly developed countries, with their progress in industrialization resulting from diversification of their economies, will start seeking markets act only for their primary products but also for their semi-manufactured and finished goods. The question is whether, from the standpoint of international division of labour, the advanced countries are prepared to provide markets for the products of these developing nations. Today, among the highly industrialized countries, international division of labour is being carried on positively to the benefit of their respective economies. But, between countries on different levels of development, instances are not rare where the advanced nations resort to measures protecting their less efficient domestic industries, under the pretext of preventing a flood of low-cost foreign products. For nations in the process of industrialization, this means that their economic growth is nipped, in the bud. I wish to point out the need on the part of advanced countries to adopt a broad policy looking to the expansion of the world economy as a whole, and to extend positive co-operation to young nations on the road to development.
193.	The recent move towards regional economic integration deserves special attention as indicative of the direction of international division of labour within a given area. Such a regional arrangement, as long as it takes an outward-looking policy, might ultimately contribute to the expansion of world trade. However, there remain apprehensions that the complementary relationship between advanced nations and newly developing countries might be overlooked or that the inward-looking character inherent in regionalism might manifest itself, especially in times of depression. I cannot but hope that full consideration will be given to removing such apprehensions in order to make possible a balanced development of the world economy as a whole.
194.	It is most gratifying that, since the inauguration of the United Nations Special Fund, the importance of international technical assistance in the pre-investment field has come to be more fully recognized and that this assistance, together with the United Nations technical assistance programmes carried out hitherto, is making conspicuous contributions to the economic development of the developing countries. Assistance to the developing countries is not charity but cooperation between them and advanced nations. As a matter of fact, it has been suggested that the technical assistance programmes of the United Nations should be renamed technical co-operation programmes. The assistance from the Special Fund is so arranged that the recipient country does not just sit and wait for it but renders active co-operation, including the furnishing of a counterpart fund. The success of this formula is heartening. I am convinced that, as long as the developing countries, aspiring to higher living standards, persevere in their efforts, they will succeed in surmounting the shortage of capital, lack of technology and all other obstacles, thus enhancing their national prosperity and well-being.
195.	World prosperity is one and indivisible, as world peace is one and indivisible. Such is the concept underlying the United Nations Charter. It is according to this concept that Japan has made its utmost co-operative effort in the assistance programmes on both bilateral and multilateral bases for the economic and social development of the developing countries. We have joined the Development Assistance Group since its establishment in March 1960, and we intend to join the International Development Association, which is scheduled to start soon. We will continue to do all in our power in any such programme along the fundamental lines of international cooperation. I am glad to announce on this occasion that the Japanese Government is prepared to increase its contributions for next year to both the Special Fund and to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance.
196.	May I add that, as an Asian country, Japan earnestly hopes that assistance by the United Nations will be further increased to the Asian countries which are making serious efforts for the development of their economies.
197.	In view of the serious economic and social impact of population increase, the Japanese delegation suggested last year [797th meeting] that the United Nations undertake research into the basic problems related to the more effective utilization, on a worlds wide basis, of human resources, including technical personnel, I hope that the proposed study of these problems will be undertaken, with the support of the other Member States, and that the related question of immigration will be considered with deeper understanding.
198.	Mr. President, I have outlined the basic positions of the Japanese delegation regarding the various problems confronting the United Nations. I wish the General Assembly the best of success under your chairmanship. To that end I pledge the all-out efforts of my delegation.
