I extend to Mr. Boland, on behalf of the Liberian delegation and myself congratulations on his election as President of the General Assembly at its fifteenth session. I am s that with your wisdom and unique experience the work of this session will be conducted in a harmonious, orderly and impartial manner.
237.	The United Nations General Assembly is meeting for the fifteenth consecutive time, and many of the questions on the agenda have occupied our minds for a period of years. It is to be hoped that we will have made some changes in our attitudes and approaches to enable us to make progress in their solution so as to reduce the tensions and relieve the anxieties of people,
238.	In a world where our problems tend to increase rather than diminish, and the differences between nations, political, ideological and religious, widen with the passage of time, the Liberian Government feels that the best hope of meeting the challenge to peace and security is the United Nations and we should give the Organization wholehearted support. Nations have at times tried to circumvent or by-pass this Organization in seeking a solution to some of the problems that vex and try our patience in a world beset with fears, suspicions and anxieties. Invariably such meetings or gatherings have not yielded the expected or desired results and in the last resort we have had to return to the conference table of the United Nations.
239.	The discussions and decisions of the Assembly have ranged over many problems — problems that have had an effect on the destiny of man wherever he lived. The United Nations has never turned a deaf ear or refused to consider an appeal from any country, however small, or from any people however backward, despite stubborn resistance by some. In many cases the aggrieved parties have not obtained the satisfaction desired, but they nevertheless have left this hall with less rancour and bitterness, taking with them the hope and aspirations of all peoples as embodied in the Charter of the United Nations,
240.	The Assembly might have become the most powerful instrument for peace, but in some decisions taken or actions contemplated there has been interjected the East-West conflict, known as the cold war. The greatest obstruction or hindrance to the implementation of its resolutions come generally not from the small Power mainly concerned, but from the support given by some of the great Powers to one side vis-à-vis the other in direct opposition to the decisions taken by the United Nations.
241.	When the Security Council, with its veto powers, had been created and made responsible for the maintenance of peace and security, the world had hoped that peace would be assured, but unfortunately this has not been the case.
242.	Many times matters are not considered and advanced on their merits, with due regard to rights and justice, but rather with regard to the political and international expediency of the particular case. Under such circumstances, resolutions of the United Nations are often obstructed if not nullified. The Organization can only become an effective instrument for peace when its decisions are honoured, respected and obeyed by all — small and great Powers alike. This will be possible if there is a “rapprochement" between East and West.
243.	It was therefore with much hope and expectation that the world looked forward to the much-publicized Summit Conference, the collapse of which on the first day of its meeting in Paris came as a great disappointment and shock.
244.	I am very pleased to express on behalf of the Liberian Government and its delegation warm greetings and sincere wishes to all the new African States and Cyprus which are represented here for the first time in this Assembly. The African States are Cameroon, Dahomey, the Niger, the Upper Volta, the Ivory Coast, Chad, Togo, Madagascar Somalia, the Congo (Leopoldville), the Central African Republic, the Congo (Brazzaville), Gabon, Senegal and Mali.
245.	We look forward to welcoming to this Organization Nigeria which is on the threshold of obtaining its independence and sovereignty and any other States which may be welcomed into this Organization before the Assembly adjournment.
246.	The new Africa which is being created by the emergence of more and more independent nations possessing vast human and material resources must be prepared to make recognized contributions to the general, scientific and technological progress and prosperity of the world community, thereby reflecting credit to our continent, to our race and to our culture. We shall have to avoid the pitfalls which have brought sufferings and misery to the world.
247.	We heartily welcome these nations into our fold and hope that they will, through their own experience, bring a new and reviving spirit and approach to the problems of the United Nations.
248.	In assuming the mastery of our own destiny, that is, the control of our own political affairs, the modelling of our own social system, the development of our own culture, the right of worship at our own altars — in short the pursuit of our happiness and prosperity, I should like to recall the words of an eminent African statesman: "In the hour of our triumph, we Africans must remember that what we seek is justice and not revenge. There is no time for us to brood over the grievances and the sufferings of the past. We look to the future — a future which we hope to see cleansed of the racial hatred which brought such misfortune upon our own people. We must extend to the white man the hand of forgiveness and fellowship. We must, invite him to join us in burying misunderstandings and in working for a better and happier world.”
249.	The sword of Damocles still hangs over mankind, and it appears each year as we witness the improvement of old, and the creation of new and more powerful weapons. The necessity for a disarmament agreement is therefore pressing. It is ironic that the more we talk about disarmament, the more we invent powerful instruments of destruction. Through fear, mistrust and suspicion, we still cling to the old conception that tile surest way to prevent war is to be fully armed. This theory did not prevent the two last major conflicts.
250.	However, disarmament in itself will not bring us the peace and security we desire. It will be necessary for us to find solutions to problems and causes which bring about fear and suspicion by adjustments which will bridge the gap between the great Powers. Having eradicated from our minds the old principle of settling differences or disagreements by force, it is necessary that we should try to implement this in good faith. The world cannot afford to continue to regard war as another means of pursuing policy.
251.	Man is by nature inclined to fight to maintain a principle or to uphold what he thinks is right and fair, or sometimes for self-aggrandisement and power. The type of weapon he has may have a restraining influence, but we can never be sure that it will have a deterrent effect. For over fourteen years we have been trying to arrive at some form of agreement on disarmament. Whenever we have reached a stalemate or deadlock, we have tried to overcome the difficulty by creating new bodies. The only thing which has changed has been the body discussing the problem. It is no wonder, then, that we have not made much progress in finding a solution to the disarmament problem.
252.	In spite of disappointments we cannot afford to despair. We have got so continue our efforts to reach an agreement, for our very survival is hanging in the balance. We must seek to end the arms race by approaching this intricate problem on the basis of right and justice and in the interest of humanity rather than for narrow national self-interest. It is only then that the dark clouds on the horizon can be dispelled.
253.	The Liberian delegation still entertains the hope that a peaceful, democratic and just settlement will he found to end the Algerian war, and that that solution will be based on the legitimate right of self-determination in conformity with the principles of the United Nations. That both parties to the conflict have accepted the principle of self-determination shows that this problem is not beyond solution.
254.	We congratulate the leaders of the provisional government of the Algerian Republic, who, motivated by a sincere desire to achieve peace, sent a delegation to France to start negotiations with the French Government. It was not out of weakness or the hopelessness of their cause that these leaders made such a journey, but rather to meet the requirements often expressed in all resolutions on Algeria that “pourparlers” or negotiations should be entered into between the parties to determine the conditions necessary for the implementation as early as possible of the right of self-determination of the Algerian people, including the conditions of a cease-fire.
255.	Colonialism in any form dies painfully and slowly. It leaves a scar on every phase of the life of a dependent or subjugated people. So deep-seated are its roots in the social, economic and political life of a people that they cannot be completely uprooted without much pain and suffering and, at times, without violence both to the colonizer and the colonized. It leaves in its wake sadness, bitterness, and sometimes almost perpetual hatred. Africa is the last bulwark of such colonialism. Overnight the face of this continent has undergone a remarkable change. It is no longer spotted with multitudinous colours representing the possession of each foreign Power. It is assuming a uniform pattern representing the common people, a common interest and a common goal. There are still a few dark stains where the African suffers the most cruel form of humiliation, suppression, torture and even death, but these too will be eradicated, for nothing can withstand this new dynamic force of nationalism that has penetrated the remotest part of this continent.
256.	In most cases the transformation from colonial rule to self-government and independence has been orderly and peaceful. As Africans we must record our appreciation and gratitude to those who have assisted in making such a smooth change. However there are cases where the transfer of power from the hands of the colonial Power to those of the subject peoples has been accompanied with strife, bloodshed and even death — as we witness today in the Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville).
257.. The difficulties afflicting the Congo are dangerous and may be a threat to international peace. But there is no need for gloom. The threat can be overcome if all States Members of the United Nations will relinquish personal and selfish ambitions for the general interests of peace through support to the United Nations. It would be futile to search for a solution which is biased or one-sided. In our opinion, the problem cannot be approached, from East or West, save in the interest of peace on earth amongst men and nations and in the interest of the Congolese people as a whole.
258.	While it regrets the unfortunate state of affairs in the Congo, the Liberian Government believes that this is not the time for accusations and recriminations but a time to find a satisfactory solution so as to prevent fratricide. We feel that the responsibility for restoring peace and order in the Congo is incumbent upon the United Nations under the terms of reference given to the Secretary-General by the Security Council. The United Nations is the only organization able to act in the Congo without the risk of a general conflict. Consequently, my delegation wishes to register once again that the Liberian Government feels the most implicit confidence in the Secretary-General of the United Nations and in his impartial, faithful and objective execution of the resolutions of the Security Council with regard to the Congo.
259.	Because the issue of the Secretary-General’s conduct in implementing the resolutions of the Security Council was considered during the debate at the recent emergency special session, when a resolution [1474 (ES-IV)] was passed without any dissenting vote, thereby endorsing the action of the Secretary-General in the Congo, the reopening of this question is contrary to generally accepted parliamentary practice.
260.	Having this in view, the Government of Liberia was one of the sponsors of the resolution adopted by the fourth emergency special session of the General Assembly, which forbids unilateral action to be taken by any nation in the present situation in the Congo for the purpose of exploiting an unfortunate situation for selfish ends.
261.	The Liberian delegation regrets the state of affairs in the Congo, but is unable to endorse the suggestion of a purely African command for the United Nations Force in the Congo. This suggestion appears to us to violate the fundamental principles of the United Nations, which should operate without regard to race, colour or creed. Moreover it would establish a precedent which might undermine the future effectiveness of the United Nations.
262.	No Member of the United Nations has a right to determine who should or should not be in charge of the Congolese Government or how it should be composed. That is a matter for the Congolese people to determine. Our duty is to assist the Congolese people to resolve their differences, not to seek to impose or support a settlement merely because of political or national interests.
263.	However, it seems to our delegation that an impasse has been reached in the Congo, and that is perhaps not due to the action or attitude of any one person. In spite of the impartiality and good intentions of the Secretary-General in implementing the resolutions of the Security Council, this impasse continues to exist and tends to obstruct the efforts of the United Nations in arriving at a solution of the problem.
264.	As we have already said this is not the time for recrimination. Our whole effort should be directed towards finding a speedy solution to the Congo situation in the interest of all the Congolese peoples, without any particular emphasis being placed on which individual should head the Government of the Congo. In these circumstances it seems to us that the United Nations must adopt other measures not only in support of its previous resolutions, but also to overcome this impasse and give more effect to these resolutions.
265.	For our part we envisage some United Nations commission, in consultation with the Secretary-General, which could go to the Congo, study the situation, consult with all concerned and endeavour to resolve the differences in keeping with the resolution passed at the fourth emergency special session on 20 September 1960.
266.	It is our opinion that no useful purpose will be served by nations, and particularly the under-developed nations, attempting to by-pass the United Nations or to flout its authority. The United Nations supports the independence and defends the sovereignty of all nations and, as many States are gaining independence today, especially the African States, it is the Organization to which we look for protection and defence in times of crisis.
267.	Under-developed nations need all the money, resources and manpower for development purposes and cannot afford the luxury of armaments. It seems sheer folly for us to follow a course of organizing and maintaining great armies like the bigger nations, first because it would be a strain on our resources and also because it would deprive us of means of development. The cost of armaments could be applied to a more useful purpose. The great Powers are themselves greatly concerned, if not fearful, of the consequences that would be involved in the use of these instruments and are frantically trying to reach agreement on the destruction and abandonment of armaments. The Liberian Government’s point of view is that the smaller countries should come forward with proposals which would emphasize the necessity for the settlement of international disputes and differences in the United Nations.
268.	The Union of South Africa has continued its opprobrious policy of “apartheid" and in March, 1960, there was an unwarranted slaughter of defenceless Africans at Sharpeville which touched the conscience of the world. Any situation based on a master race theory is a serious threat to peace. Governments which fail to recognize this may have to be saved from the consequences of their reckless policy. This state of affairs cannot continue without endangering international peace and security. In such an instance it cannot be a matter of domestic jurisdiction. My delegation therefore hopes that this Assembly will express its opinion on such lawlessness and take necessary action to prevent such repulsive acts by a Member State.
269.	The question of South West Africa continues unsettled, and the people of that Territory are still without relief. As may be recalled, the Second Conference of Independent African States, meeting at Addis Ababa in June I960, reviewed General Assembly resolution 338 (IV) covering the legal action open to Member States to refer the dispute with the Union of South Africa on interpretation of the application of the Mandate for South West Africa, to the International Court of Justice for adjudication in accordance with Article 37 of the Statute of the Court. My delegation wishes to notify Member States and the United Nations that in order to bring to an end this long and vexing issue, the Government of Liberia, in association with the Government of Ethiopia, intends to bring a case against the Union of South Africa before the International Court of Justice and it is our sincere hope that the Court will give this great matter the serious attention and consideration it deserves and that a decision will be rendered as speedily as possible.
270.	Multilateral assistance administered by the United Nations and its specialized agencies to underdeveloped countries is often preferred to unilateral aid. But the present technical assistance programmes of the international agencies do not appear to be adequate. My delegation therefore hopes that some plan of expansion can be worked out, because it is necessary for the preservation of peace that the gulf between the developed and under-developed countries be narrowed as rapidly as possible.
271.	With the emergence of such a considerable number of new States in Africa, my delegation strongly feels and recommends that membership in the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council should be expanded because of the large increase in membership of the Organization. Undoubtedly, the participation of these States could be useful in creating a balance by contributing in a substantial manner to the progress and activities of the Councils of the United Nations.
272.	Into the Charter of the United Nations was written the principle of unanimity among the five permanent members of the Security Council. We have witnessed on several occasions how operations of the United Nations have been paralysed by this procedure.
273.	The Liberian delegation feels that any revision of the Charter which abolishes the position of Secretary-General in favour of an executive triumvirate operating on the basis of unanimity or predicated on regional alignments or blocs would only contribute to the total and complete destruction of the United Nations and would travesty the principles on which the Organization was founded. Instead of creating new blocs, my delegation feels that we should strive to do away with all blocs and seek to create one brotherhood among men.
274.	I think we are at a critical turning point in modern history; an era of political and economic transformations, of social upheavals and international tensions. This period marks the beginning of the liquidation of the concept of power politics, imperialism and colonial empires. It is, in short, an era of the recognition of the dignity and worth of every individual human bong, and of the right of self-determination of all peoples.
275.	The changes taking place in the world in general and in Africa in particular in this age impose upon the Members of this Organization, especially the great industrial Powers, the responsibility of underwriting the peace and happiness of mankind.
276.	The United Nations is a purposeful Organization. Its aim, as I understand it, is to unify peoples of divergent cultures and political ideals towards new expressions of their creative mind in all aspects of existence, and in the exercise of their potentialities beyond narrow national conceptions and material standards. It is designed to enrich man’s taste and, by association, open to him unlimited frontiers of the mind, so that his energies may be channelled from crude physical indulgence and sterile competition for the sake of competition only, and from all ingenious contrivances of mutual destruction, to loftier heights and ideals.
277.	All Africans know that if it were not for this Organization the changes in world affairs which have made 1960 the year of Africa would have been improbable if not impossible. We therefore implore all friends of Africa to accept and embrace the United Nations, notwithstanding its seeming imperfections, as the palladium of our liberties and as the source of our political peace in the years ahead.
278.	The Liberian delegation sincerely expresses the hope all action will be avoided which may tend to make the United Nations impotent and unable to fulfil the functions envisaged in its Charter. We are not prepared to take any action which would have such an unfortunate result.
279.	It is the hope of my delegation that at the fifteenth session of the General Assembly, Member States have come prepared to make a bold, just and serious attempt to resolve some of the burning issues which plague the world today, bringing in their wake disappointment, frustration and tension, and not to intensify existing conflicts. We appeal for a, new realistic approach to our diplomatic, thinking, so that the peoples of the world will be given the assurance that peace and tranquillity will prevail.
