If  were not anxious, like all my colleagues, to take into consideration all the important suggestions made by the President with regard to the conduct of our debates, I should be tempted, English and French being the official languages in Canada, to speak in French as well as in English in the course of the short statement I am about to make.
My delegation, however, has itself suggested that we should study means of saving time in our future sessions. We must be logical. There is no doubt that we can save time by utilizing the services of our excellent translators who are able to prepare in advance the translations of the speeches that are made here. That is what has been done. I hope that there will be some other occasion when I can have distributed to you the English text of a speech instead of the French.
Canada welcomes the forthright way in which the Secretary-General and various delegations have brought to the attention of this Assembly the failure of the United Nations to make more rapid progress in implementing some of the major undertakings of the San Francisco Charter, months to be on trial. Its interests will not be the public in our countries is conscious of these shortcomings, and we feel it is well that we should admit them. The United Nations, sixteen months after the signature of the Charter, is still, and is apt to continue for many more served by concealing any disappointment caused by its operations.
Canada is glad that attention has been drawn in this Assembly to what the United Nations has been able to accomplish. These accomplishments are impressive. But it is more important that this Assembly should take steps to remedy the shortcomings of the United Nations rather than derive too great satisfaction from what we have been able to accomplish.
We are particularly concerned that the Security Council and the Military Staff Committee have so far failed to make substantial progress toward the conclusion of the special agreements with individual Members required to implement Article 43, and those following, of the Charter and thus make armed forces and other facilities available to the Security Council. We are all of us bound, under the Charter, to refrain from using armed forces except as provided by the Charter. The Government and people of Canada are anxious to know what armed forces, in common with other Members of the United Nations, Canada should maintain as its share of the burden of putting world force behind world law.
Only when the special agreements with the Council have been concluded shall we be able to determine how large a proportion of the total annual production of our country can properly be devoted to improving the living conditions of the Canadian people.
Canada therefore urges that the Security Council and the Military Staff Committee go ahead with all possible speed in the constructive work of negotiating the special agreements and of organizing the military and economic measures of enforcement. It appears to us that it would be in the interest of all Members of the United Nations to see the Security Council equipped and ready to enforce proper decisions for the maintenance of world peace, and also, as a consequence to see serious consideration given to the reduction of national armaments so that the productive capacity of the world thus conserved may be used for improving the living conditions of all peoples.
The President of the United States of America, in Iris memorable speech to this Assembly, urged that the Members of the United Nations should use the Security Council “as a means for promoting the settlement of disputes as well as for airing them.” The Security Council has not so far given the impression that it was taking positive action to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes.
We agree that now is not the time to try to amend the Charter. But we also say that now is the time for the Assembly to make practical recommendations on how, within the framework of the Charter as it is, the Security Council can more effectively discharge the vital functions so confidently entrusted to it by all the Members of the United Nations.
This Assembly will be required to give a practical interpretation of some of the most important provisions of the Charter. In establishing these precedents, it is necessary to remember that it is a constitution which we are interpreting and not a domestic statute. I venture to suggest that the Charter, to be successful, must be interpreted in such a way as to encourage its growth and adaptation to changing conditions.
The peoples of the United Nations have the right to expect that, wherever the meaning of a provision of the Charter is doubtful, this Assembly will interpret it in the way best calculated to strengthen the authority and prestige of the United Nations. We would like to see provisions which add to the authority of the United Nations or of its organs and officers broadly interpreted, and those which detract from the authority of the United Nations given a restrictive interpretation.
There cannot be lasting peace in the absence of a system of international order based upon justice and regulated by law. We must strive to fortify the juridical functions of the United Nations. Acceptance by all Members of the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice with a minimum of reservations would be a step in this direction. I trust that we shall all agree that the obligation of the Assembly under Article 13 of the Charter to encourage “the progressive development of international law and its codification” should be implemented as soon as possible. The Canadian delegation welcomes the request of the United States of America that this matter be discussed.
The people of my country, in common with the peoples of many other countries, are bearing heavy financial burdens as the result of the war. We are all, I am sure, concerned over the mounting cost of participation in international organizations, not only the cost of direct financial contributions but also the cost of sending full delegations to their meetings. All of us are willing to bear our fair share of the necessary expenditures, and all of us readily recognize that these expenditures are small indeed as compared to the cost of war. On the other hand, this Assembly must be able to satisfy public opinion throughout the world that the finances of the Organization are being employed in the best interests of the United Nations. We must be assured that the Secretariat possesses the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, and that the budgetary and financial administration of the United Nations is beyond reproach.
We must also take every possible precaution against the unnecessary multiplication of international organizations, conferences, councils and commissions. Our delegation has observed with satisfaction that the Secretary-General, in his oral report to the Assembly, drew attention to the fact that the larger the number of specialized agencies, the greater will be the financial burden on Member Governments and the greater will be the danger of overlapping and duplication, with a consequent wasteful diversion of effort and of resources.
Wasteful diversion also results from unnecessary prolongation of international meetings in terms of their accomplishment. This imposes unnecessary burdens not only on the international organizations concerned but also on the national Governments and their delegations. Canada has accordingly requested that the Assembly set up without delay a committee to make specific recommendations to it at this session on measures to economize the time of future sessions.
The Canadian delegation, representing all major political parties in my country, desires to associate itself with the declaration made by the President of the United States of America. The people of Canada, as well as the people of the United States, “look upon the United Nations not as a temporary expedient but as a permanent partnership, a partnership among the peoples of the world for their common peace and common well-being.”
My own Prime Minister, speaking a few months ago at a plenary session of the Paris Conference, said: “Years of war have	 surely taught us that no man liveth to himself, and that no nation liveth to itself. We are all members one of another.”
Each State represented here has it own ideals, its own standards, its own ways of life. Differences of outlook are therefore inevitable. It is what we do about these differences that is crucial. Attempts to exploit them to the advantage of any nation or group of nations can accomplish nothing wholesome or constructive. Let us beware of recrimination, of charge and counter-charge. Let us, with good will, patience and forbearance, pursue the course which leads to the resolution and not to the exploitation of differences. Let us proceed with the business of this Assembly, all of us determined to work together in the interests of peace and understanding among the nations. In this way alone can we produce a record of accomplishment worthy of the respect of all the peoples of a united world.
