My first words must be to express to the Government and people of the United States of America, the Chinese delegation’s deep appreciation of the hospitality and facilities extended to the United Nations for holding the General Assembly.
We are deeply indebted, especially, to the authorities and citizens of this great metropolis of New York, for their generous assistance in providing for our comfort and enjoyment during our sojourn here. This is, indeed, no small accomplishment, in view of the world-wide shortage of many necessities of life which prevails, to a certain extent, even in this land of fabulous abundance and prosperity.
The General Assembly is holding its first meeting on the soil of the United States. This is an historic event and one of great significance to our Organization. I recall that when I attended, a quarter of a century ago, the first meeting of the League of Nations, some of the most powerful States in the world were then conspicuous by their absence. Historians have since observed that the non-participation of these major Powers in the League at that time was one of the principal causes of its ultimate failure.
Fortunately, the United Nations now includes among its Members all the major peace-loving Powers, and today it is meeting on the territory of this great Republic, where it will establish its permanent home.
Our Assembly was honoured on its opening day by the presence of' the chief magistrate of this country, who declared to us that the United States will support the United Nations with all the resources that it possesses. These are signal facts full of promise for our Organization.
Our task here in the General Assembly is a heavy and important one. There are over fifty items on the provisional agenda and supplementary list which we shall have to consider and discuss. The report of the Secretary-General, supplemented by his oral report in the Assembly the other day, and those of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council, all of which form the basis of our general debate today, and in the days to come, clearly indicate the variety of problems with which we have to deal, and the importance of decisions we have to make. It is therefore to be expected that during the coming weeks we must work with unremitting energy in order to complete our work.
I do not propose to comment at length here upon the three reports, but I will take this opportunity, with your indulgence, to indicate briefly the views of the Chinese Government in regard to some of the questions dealt with in the reports.
The translation of the San Francisco Charter into a complete machinery for the preservation of peace and security and for the advancement of human welfare was begun in London last winter. Since then, our Organization has made further progress. It remains for us now to complete the work of organization, and to implement the measures adopted to assure efficient working.
If the United Nations is to become a really effective instrument to discharge its manifold duties, a number of administrative, but highly important, problems must be given early solution. These include the approval of the budget of the Secretariat and other organs for 1946 and 1947; the apportionment of contributions among Member Governments; the inauguration of a system of financial control; and the problem of finalizing the arrangements for the permanent home of the United Nations.
The Security Council has presented us with a report of the highest interest. During the past ten months of its existence, the Council has dealt with a number of questions which arose, perhaps inevitably, out of the war; issues were debated freely and frankly, and often with animation, if not with acrimony; arguments and facts were examined thoroughly. All this shows, in my mind, the democratic nature of the discussions in the Council and it gives the peoples of the world something of a glimpse of the workings of this highest political tribunal of the United Nations, charged with the responsibility of maintaining world peace and security. It also bears testimony to the practice of open diplomacy by the Council, and to the observance of the doctrine of “open covenants openly arrived at”.
The Chinese Government, through its representative on the Council, has tried its best to facilitate agreement and contribute to the attainment of- concrete results. However, it could not but wish that the Council had been able to devote less time to questions of procedure, and achieve a greater measure of agreement on the political problems brought before it for settlement.
Much interest has also been aroused over what is generally known as the question of the veto in the voting procedure of the Security Council, as provided under Article 27 of the Charter. The real issue is the rule of unanimity which the permanent members of the Security Council are entitled to invoke in making any important decision. Because of the frequent resort to it in the proceedings of the Security Council, this rule has given rise to much criticism and debate as to the extent to which it should be invoked, and to the circumstances in which its application might be justified. It will be recalled that this provision, Article 27 of the Charter, especially the rule of unanimity, originated in special circumstances and was inspired by a genuine desire to ensure unity of the permanent members, which were charged with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
This unity of action, in the opinion of the Chinese Government, is still much needed to promote the success of our world Organization. The Chinese Government, however, believes that, while it is too early to consider any review of the Charter for the purposes of modifying the rule of unanimity, the right to insist upon this requirement should be exercised sparingly and with a sense of discrimination. The representative of the Chinese Government on the Security Council, in the past months, has never once invoked the rule of unanimity to prevent a decision being taken where his views differed from those of the other four permanent members of the Council. Invariably, in the interest of unity and out of a desire to facilitate agreement, he has refrained from exercising this exceptional right.
If, therefore, a way could be found which will meet with the consensus of opinion to guide the practical application of this rule of unanimity along the paths of moderation, without having to modify the Charter in any way, the Chinese Government on its part will raise no objection.
The Economic and Social Council is to be congratulated on its valuable report. In this report we see how varied are the fields for constructive efforts, and how much can be done to promote economic prosperity and social progress.
China attaches the greatest importance to the work of the Economic and Social Council, for it is her belief that functional co-operation in the economic and social fields is a sure way to peace, and the betterment of man’s estate in all parts of the world is the key to his security. Through international constructive co-operation the world will develop a new loyalty to the cause of the United Nations, a loyalty which extends beyond national boundaries, and which knows no limits in race, religion or political creeds. So long as ill health, ignorance and poverty prevail, no safeguard to the rights of men can be real or can endure.
It is therefore gratifying to us to note that an International Health Organization Conference, which was proposed by China and Brazil at San Francisco, was duly convened by the Economic and Social Council in New York in June this year, and that an Interim Commission is now meeting in Geneva to work out a programme for the World Health Organization. This will be the first specialized agency to be established under the sponsorship of the Economic and Social Council, and we should bring it into definite relationship with the United Nations at the earliest practicable date.
Closely connected with the question of health is the control of narcotic drugs, in which China takes a special interest. It is hoped that the resolution relating to the establishment of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the draft Protocol will be promptly implemented so that the international machinery of control may continue with as little interruption as possible.
Then, let me add, China has always stressed the importance of continuous world economic progress and expansion. While attention must be given to the question of ironing out the so-called economic cycle and the elimination of large unemployment, it is equally vital to emphasize the need of having a consistent upward trend of world economy. In view of the importance of this development work, the Chinese delegation believes that the Sub-Commission on Economic Development, under the Economic and Employment Commission, should be raised to the status of a full commission.
As we all know, UNRRA, which has done much to relieve the sufferings of mankind and to help rehabilitate the devastated countries, is now approaching a period of termination of its activities, but the needs of the suffering countries still remain very great. It is important, in our opinion, for the United Nations to continue at least a part of the work of UNRRA in so far as possible, such as the proposed establishment of an International Refugee Organization and the creation of an International Children’s Emergency Fund.
The preparations for holding an international conference on trade and employment are also, in our view, very important.
In the opinion of the Chinese delegation, all these endeavours will contribute to human welfare and world peace and should therefore be given every encouragement and support.
China regards the implementation of the provisions of the Charter, concerning the respect for and the universal observance of human rights, as a matter of vital importance. We are glad to find the Commission on Human Rights already set up. We are equally glad to find the Sub-Commission on the Status of Women raised to the status of a full commission. For centuries, Chinese philosophers have emphasized the need of respect for the dignity of man regardless of differences of race, religion or creed.
The Chinese Government has noted also with gratification the establishment of the International Court of Justice at The Hague. This is one of the principal organs of our United Nations, which is entrusted with the duty of safeguarding the cause of international law and justice. As a mark of its confidence and its faith, the Chinese Government has very recently taken the necessary steps to recognize the compulsory jurisdiction of this highest judicial tribunal of the world in relation to any State which accepts the same obligation, and on the sole condition of reciprocity for a period of five years and thereafter until the expiration of a six months’ notice of termination.
The Chinese Government attaches importance also to the carrying out of Article 13 of the Charter regarding the progressive development of international law and its codification. Its policy has always been to promote the rule of law in international relations. In order to further this objective, China has urged that wherever and whenever an opportunity presents itself, steps be taken to develop and codify international law.
The Chinese delegation is therefore gratified to note on the agenda the United States proposal concerning the implementation of this Article, and the Chinese Government will be prepared to give its full support. In this connexion, let me say how pleased I was to hear so many speakers before me also stressing this point, the importance of codifying and developing international law; I mention, in particular, the distinguished representative of Egypt.
I wish also to state that the Chinese delegation was deeply impressed by the emphasis which President Truman laid, in his speech before this Assembly last Wednesday, upon the principle applied by the Nurnberg Tribunal that planning, initiating or waging a war of aggression is a crime against humanity, for which individuals as well as States should be tried before the bar of international justice. This principle is a great contribution to the cause of peace and worthy of consecration in what our Secretary-General calls a “revitalized system of international law.”
The Chinese Government looks with favour upon the admission of truly qualified new Member States. It is, I believe, the common hope of us all that the United Nations will rapidly become a universal Organization. This idea of universality is our ultimate goal. We should look forward to the day when all the nations of the world will be found truly committed to a policy of good neighbourliness and fully qualified to join the United Nations in our common search for peace.
There are other problems having to do with the implementation of certain provisions of the Charter which are of transcendent importance. One is the establishment of the Trusteeship Council, which is the only Council not yet organized. The Chinese delegation is gratified to note that a number of trusteeship agreements have been officially submitted for United Nations’ approval and it earnestly hopes that, with the approval of these agreements, the Trusteeship Council can be set up without further delay. For it must be remembered that upon the United Nations repose the hopes of millions of Non-Self-Governing Peoples throughout the world who look to it for the realization of their aspirations for independence or self-government.
The carrying out of the principles and obligations of certain Powers, under Chapter XI, to promote the welfare and development of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories which are administered by them and which do not come under the international trusteeship system, is a matter of vital importance not only to the peoples concerned but also to the United Nations.
The Chinese delegation notes with satisfaction that the Secretary-General has taken the first step to implement the resolution of the General Assembly, aiming to make available to the United Nations information transmitted to him by Member States under Article 73 e, of the Charter, relating to the economic, social and educational conditions in the territories for which they are responsible and which are outside the trusteeship system. It is especially gratifying that three Member States have already transmitted to the Secretary-General the information on their Non-Self-Governing Territories required under this Article. It cannot be urged too strongly that this splendid example be followed by other States administering colonies and territories other than Trust Territories.
Another question is that of strengthening the collective peace system of the United Nations by v providing the Security Council with an international military force as provided in Article 43 of the Charter. In order to attain this end, it is necessary to conclude the special agreements mentioned in the same Article. The Chinese delegation hopes that the Military Staff Committee, which has been meeting since last February, will find it possible to make more rapid progress in its work so that the Security Council will be in a position to discharge its duties effectively as the guardian of world peace.
I wish to say a word now about the work of the Atomic Energy Commission. This body is charged, under its terms of reference, with a duty of great urgency and crucial importance to humanity’s future. Upon the successful conclusion of its work depends, to a large degree, the problem of dispelling suspicion and mistrust among the nations of the post-war world. China ardently hopes that agreement will be reached in the Commission on all phases of its work as rapidly as possible, and she, on her part, will do all she can to help promote such agreement.
Finally, I wish to say a brief word upon the need of early restoration of peace and prosperity, which constitute an indispensable condition for the successful functioning of our Organization. Less than a fortnight ago, a great conference of peace-making was adjourned in Paris, after having approved the draft treaties to be concluded with five ex-enemy States, and I have no doubt similar efforts will be made to restore conditions of peace with other ex-enemy States in Europe and the Far East.
But the point I wish to make is this: that only when all the peace settlements are made can the world really settle down and devote its whole attention to the work of reconstruction. It is testimony of high statesmanship and great wisdom that our Organization, the United Nations, bears no organic relationship to the system of peace treaties to be set up. While these treaties will formally mark the end of an epoch of unprecedented bloodshed and destruction, our Organization aims to establish a new era of peace, prosperity and happiness.
The peoples of the world have suffered immeasurably from a prolonged war, and they are entitled to a lasting peace and to all the blessings which peace brings. Twice in their lifetime they have suffered from mass slaughter and destruction. They must be spared the horrors of another war. Just as they turn to their Governments to raise their living standards and to provide them with an opportunity to do their part, to make their contribution, toward progress and enlightenment, so they are looking, most anxiously, to us, the United Nations, to safeguard world peace and to promote human welfare.
Therefore, let all nations, great or small, strong or weak, work together in a like mind and with a single purpose, to bring about a new era of peace, prosperity and happiness. Let us dedicate, rededicate, ourselves to the sacred duty of building a new world of abiding faith and enduring peace.