The Cuban delegation earnestly hopes that the debates in the General Assembly will be carried on in a cordial spirit of mutual understanding. Likewise we feel confident, in the event that this Assembly decides to revise the Charter, that we shall have before us the following objectives:
1.	Modification of the voting system in the Security Council, eliminating from it the veto privilege;
2.	Making compulsory the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice;
3.	Revision of the Article which refers to the admission of Members to the Organization.
I shall not here express the reasons for which Cuba is asking for the elimination of the veto, privilege, because this will be explained when the motion presented by our delegation is submitted to debate. Also, we do not believe this to be an opportune moment to go into further details on the veto question, because our delegation has reason to hope that a cordial and friendly solution may be found for this vitally important problem, thus avoiding bitter debates on the floor of this Assembly.
As regards the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, we consider that all Member States must submit to the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, in order to avoid its acceptance by certain States in such a conditional way as to nullify that acceptance.
With respect to the Article which deals with membership, it is our considered opinion that specific mention must be made not only of the necessary conditions for admittance of new Members, but also of the indispensable requisites for continued membership in the Organization.
The term “peace-loving States,” mentioned in Article 4 of the Charter is not only ambiguous but likewise ridiculous.
One of Cuba’s principal aims is a United Nations with a truly universal character. This is why we particularly deplore the absence of certain States whose presence among us would contribute effectively towards our ideal of a world ruled by international law and justice.
There is another problem which will come before this Assembly for consideration and which especially concerns Cuba and the Spanish-speaking countries, namely, the Spanish question.
So far, the measures taken by the United Nations against Franco have ended in complete failure. These measures have in fact accomplished the exact reverse of what was intended: instead of overthrowing Franco they have strengthened his regime. It would therefore be not only useless, but harmful, to repeat the same errors. We must ensure, by all means, that the smouldering Spanish problem does not become the bone of contention between East and West. We must make sure that any action on this matter will preclude partisan aims and be based purely on democratic ideals.
The Spanish-American countries are especially entitled to raise their voices in this vital question. It is our conviction, and allow me to put the greatest emphasis on these words, that no true Spaniard will ever resent as an intervention in the internal affairs of his country, any action on the part of the Spanish-American nations intended to assure the happiness and the peace of the Spanish people.
The Spanish question is now under the jurisdiction of the Security Council. Cuba does not intend to take any initiative on this matter. But should this question be raised, the Cuban delegation pledges itself to offer a formula consistent with the principles of the Charter, and in accordance with the dignity and the patriotism of the Spanish people.
May God enlighten and guide our deliberations, and enable us to achieve positive benefits toward the peace and welfare of humanity.