I am a little more moved than usual as I rise to address this Assembly of the United Nations today, 28 October, Czechoslovakia’s Independence Day, for I cannot help but remember an event that took place only a few yards away from this building, which no one then imagined would become the Capitol of the United Nations, the meeting place of representatives from all corners of the globe. It was in 1939, after my country had been invaded and desecrated, that the Czechoslovak flag was solemnly raised, a few yards from the platform on which I have the honour to be standing now, on the Czechoslovak pavilion at the World’s Fair.
That fact was in itself an important historical declaration of my country’s continued existence among the free, sovereign and independent nations of the world. The presence of Mr. Benes, my President, at that ceremony gave it a very deep significance and gave the people at home the hope of a new lease on life at the darkest moment in our history. That was before the war started.
Czechoslovakia is free again. Benes is at home, unanimously re-elected President of Czechoslovakia, and it is on behalf of this free Czechoslovakia that I am speaking to you today.
My delegation has studied the report of the Secretary-General. I am not going to comment on many of its subjects. I trust we shall have an occasional opportunity to raise our voices on questions contained therein which are of special interest to my country.
From 1918 to 1938, Czechoslovakia gained the friendship and confidence of the whole civilized world. We are proud of our tradition and of our record, and we intend to continue it.
Czechoslovakia, a small State placed at one of Europe’s most important economic and cultural crossroads, is vitally interested in the successful accomplishment of the great tasks before us. Already at. San Francisco, I stressed the idea that friendly, efficient and lasting co-operation among the great Powers is a necessary prerequisite for the building of permanent peace. The war was won by this greatest of alliances, led by the Big and helped by the Not-So-Big, and only thus can the peace be won and preserved. I am not giving advice. I make bold to express my people’s hope.
The Secretary-General in his report very appropriately mentioned the disturbing fact that the remnants of fascism have not been eliminated, and he was justified in reminding us of the stern and just verdict of Nurnberg. He also reminded us that much remains to be accomplished before the disastrous damage to economy, culture, health and international co-operation will finally disappear.
I deeply appreciate his mention of the World Health Organization, and the creation of an International Children’s Fund. There are many, many pale children and many, many war orphans left to our care. There are too many tubercular children in the war-ravaged countries, including Czechoslovakia. That is a challenge to us all.
I am glad he mentioned the fundamental freedom for all, and also the fact that a Commission on the Status of Women has been established. The sooner we give to women what we have long owed them, the better for the United Nations.
The Secretary-General mentioned the Spanish question and, in my modest estimation, he had full right to do so; more than that, it is his duty, according to the Charter, to call bur attention to conditions, wherever they may exist, which appear to him to be a danger to peace, democracy and freedom.
We fought this war to abolish fascism, and we should continue to do so wherever it still exists. The Czechoslovak Government has recognized the Republican Spanish Government in exile. I remember only too well — for it is a very short while ago that I was a member of a Government in exile — what a boon and blessing it was for us when various Governments gave us their recognition.
I have heard a great deal about the existence of what some people call “the iron curtain” over Czechoslovakia. I have been living there since the end of the war, and on behalf of my Government and my delegation, I wish to assure you that there is no iron, or any other, curtain over Czechoslovakia, and if there are those who have any doubts about it, all I can say to them is, “Come and see for yourselves.” There will be no trouble about the visas. May I suggest, in all modesty, that perhaps there is some kind of a curtain or screen around Spain.
Czechoslovakia is a loyal Member of the United Nations. We have a treaty with the great Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. We are resolved to live up to every article of this treaty and to fulfill the agreement which we voluntarily and gladly signed. We wish to live in friendship and political and economic co-operation with all free and democratic countries. That, people of good will should know.
We have made considerable progress since the end of the war. The distribution of the food that we have is second to none in Europe, and the standard of living is slowly but surely rising. Our people have shown a remarkable degree of discipline and political wisdom by seeing to it that everybody gets an equal share, and there is almost no black market in my country.
I am saying this because one hears occasionally that Czechoslovakia is better off than other countries and does not need help. I am a little sad because it suggests that we are less deserving for trying desperately to put our house in order. Indeed, we are very grateful for the help that comes to us from the outside. The job that UNRRA did in my country was very fine indeed, and, again, I wish to thank UNRRA on behalf of the people of Czechoslovakia.
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has helped and is helping us in many ways, besides supplying raw materials and trading with us. We are deeply grateful for this assistance, but we need more before our industry and the industry of our people can even approach the position they held in international economics prior to 1938.
The Secretary-General has stressed, and I am especially grateful to him for it, that countries whose economic life is based on private enterprise and those whose industries are altogether or, as it is in my country, partly controlled by the State, should be able to find a common denominator for the exchange of commodities and for reinstatement of normal relations generally. We are eager to normalize our economic relations with the whole world.
The Czechoslovak delegation is glad that the Economic and Social Council has finished laying the foundation for its work by creating several Commissions and has begun its important tasks. And, as I said during the General Assembly in London and I repeat it now, what will be done now in the next year or two may be more important than what will be done in the next few decades.
In conclusion, I would like to mention the Conference of Paris. Czechoslovakia had several problems which it presented to that conference. One was the transfer of a limited number of people of ethnic Magyar origin to their homeland. We accepted a compromise in order to show my Government’s willingness to co-operate. This compromise was accepted unanimously, as were the resolutions of all the other questions we raised in Paris. I am somewhat proud of that record.
There are going to be, I am sure, some important discussions on the question of the veto. I would like the question with which we are going to deal to be settled by unanimity as were the Czechoslovak desiderata in Paris. I know that is asking a great deal but, if the Great Powers agree, the small countries will have a much better chance.
On behalf of Czechoslovakia, I wish to make a pledge that we shall do our best to safeguard and protect the very heart of Europe where Providence has placed us. With your helpful understanding, our important task will be made easier; I ask for it on the basis of reciprocity.
And so, onward United Nations, marching on to peace.