A new world is being born from the fragments of the world which was torn asunder by the most terrifying of wars. The peoples of the world have given their chosen representatives the task of ensuring that the new-born child should have stability and strength in an atmosphere of lasting, fruitful and happy peace.
The delegation of the Republic of Haiti has, with enthusiastic faith, come also to join her modest efforts to those of the eminent ambassadors of the United Nations.
Anguish, torments and sufferings in common — what powerful and unbreakable bonds in the hours of danger!
Throughout five years, closely linked without distinction of race, creed, speech or religion, merging in common their wealth, their energy and their blood, the Allied nations fought with unbelievable bravery, with a superhuman courage unequalled in history.
They fought thus to preserve that which gives to life its very meaning: freedom.
Now, however, that the war is over, ideas still remain in opposition; the battle for peace goes on; for peace is something more than the end of a state of war. Its radiance is that of liberty. The citizen who is struggling with his conscience is not at peace; nor is a world at peace if it lives in a state of constant alarm. For the individual, as for the State, peace means freedom from tragic anxieties; freedom from hunger, from fear and from ignorance; freedom from the shameful weaknesses which so dreadfully mutilated that fine civilization of which our century was so proud; the abolition of all barriers, of all bastilles.
Advances in science have rendered international unity indispensable. Yesterday, the world broke up into hostile blocs with disconcerting speed because it lacked the one thing essential for unity: the spirit of brotherhood.
There we find the true source of the freedom, justice and peace for which mankind has such a burning thirst. The spirit of brotherhood alone is the true foundation of the law of mutual assistance which is as binding on all States as on citizens; it, alone can account for noble crusades and the tremendous responsibilities of leadership; it, alone, can destroy the poison of hate among peoples, and replace it with that incomparable force of all the ages: love.
That is what Professor Jacques Maritain means when he asserts that democracy is more than a philosophical system, more than a frame of mind, more than a political doctrine, more than a form of government — it is nothing less than a condition of the soul, a condition of the soul imbued with the love of man as was so well exemplified in that great citizen of the world, Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Brotherhood! Radiant being, giving forth flame and warmth. May you shed your light on the labours of this august Assembly and guide the conscience of all peoples so that “the buildings of the future may never turn into tombs”.