We wish to limit our participation in this general debate to a few remarks of a general nature, with the intention of making known our views on the various questions on the agenda as and when they come up for discussion.
The Netherlands delegation welcomes this second part of the first session of the General Assembly, in particular, because this quasi-universal gathering of representatives of the peace-loving nations symbolizes the fact that, whatever our immediate affinities, we belong, in Wendell Willkie’s immortal phrase, to “one world”.
Whatever dissensions may become apparent in that one world from time to time, the fact remains that no emergence of special groups will prevail against the fact that it is one world. We know, and we deplore, that this fact is still being given insufficient recognition and implementation. But we are sure that it will end by asserting itself triumphantly, just as we are sure that the world is large enough to allow nations with fundamentally different ideologies to live and work together in prosperity and peace on a basis of mutual tolerance.
"We realize that the work of the United Nations is still in a preliminary stage. So long as the peace treaties have not been completed, the firm foundation is lacking on which the work of the United Nations may assume and manifest its final form. We hope and pray that, on a basis of sagacity and forbearance, wise and workable peace treaties may soon be in operation. Constructive co-operation of the great Powers is the first prerequisite. Due recognition of the position of the smaller Powers is the second.
The situation in Spain has been mentioned by several speakers. We are second to none in our amity for the Spanish nation, and in our aversion for a regime such as that which continues to be in power in Spain. For that very reason we think that these sentiments should not prevent us from viewing the situation with the necessary common sense, lest we contribute involuntarily to the consolidation of that regime, hurt the economic well-being of the Spanish people, and go beyond the Charter.
Our point of view with regard to the vexed veto question will be made clear in detail when that problem comes up for discussion. It is well known that we reject the veto in principle, being unwilling to concede that anyone, in any society, may be a judge of his own cause. At the same time we are not blind to the realities of the political situation and to the imperfections of the international community. We remain determined to oppose abuse and excess from any quarter. We shall, however, be found ready to acquiesce, for as long as is unavoidable, in such special prerogatives for the great Powers as do not seem unreasonable. But for our readiness to do so we expect and want a counterpart, in the sense that the veto be used only in cases of real importance and clear necessity.
We are happy to note that various countries, among them the Netherlands, have intimated their intention to submit data with regard to Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration. In so far as such Territories are a part of the Netherlands Kingdom, it is to be noted that they are. to receive, at no distant date, the status of self-governing units.
As new territories are elected for membership to the United Nations and as older peaceful States are admitted, we shall bring nearer the attainment of that universal membership of all peace-loving nations which is the aim of the Charter. This year the Netherlands will rejoice to see three new deserving Members admitted to the United Nations.
We hope that this second part of the first session of the General Assembly will be conspicuous by fruitful work and action. We are firmly convinced that the success of this Organization is not to be found in a multiplication of machinery, of questionnaires and reports, but in deeds. But we are equally firmly convinced that in order to succeed, we depend on the indispensable blessing of the All-highest. We shall do our utmost to deserve it, and we shall do that in the Netherlands tradition, that is, not as members of any one particular group or as followers of one or more great Powers, but as a Member of the United Nations using its own judgment.