Saudi Arabia solemnly acclaims this meeting of the General Assembly of the United Nations in the New World, and hopes that it will in fact mark the advent of a really new world founded on principles of freedom, equality and justice. It was in this country that was born the idea of a new organization designed to replace the League of Nations — the League of Nations which failed because the United States of America refused to be a member, and also because the other nations lacked the enthusiasm needed to ensure its success. The new organization is starting out under favourable auspices. Every effort is being made to benefit from the experience gained by the League of Nations and to rectify, so far as circumstances permit, the errors committed in the past and in respect of which no individual person or group of persons can claim to be exempt.
Saudi Arabia, whose legislation is based on Islamic Law observed by over three hundred million souls, joins with President Truman and a great many of the speakers in this Assembly in expressing the hope that lasting peace and security for all may be established here, so that the people may devote themselves to improving their social and economic conditions.
The sole desire of Saudi Arabia is to see the reign of world freedom, with equal rights and duties for all men, communities and Governments; for the Arab civilisation is fundamentally democratic and knows no discrimination of race or colour, all men being equal in the eyes of the law.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the Government of Saudi Arabia should press for respect of the principle of complete equality between the States, whether great or small, strong or weak, since that is a natural right for all nations and there can be no greater power than that of right and justice.
The Government of Saudi Arabia therefore gladly welcomes any suggestion calculated to promote equality and justice in international life. If it is proposed that the General Assembly revise the right of veto granted to a group of Powers on the ground 'that such a privilege prevents the application of the principle on which our Organization is founded — the principle of equality between States — such a proposal will have our wholehearted support. Similarly, we shall welcome any proposal to strengthen the International Court of Justice or to increase the authority of international law, because any such measure would help to consolidate the framework of a justice which, according to the San Francisco Charter, should reign supreme throughout the world.
The best way to fulfil our aspirations towards a new world is through steadfast solidarity between the nations in applying the principles of justice and law. Saudi Arabia has effectively co-operated with her sister countries of the Arab World in presenting a model of total solidarity which enables us to act as a single unit in building the future peace. The Arab League rests on this basis and is, as it were, a forerunner, in the Near East, of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I should like to thank the authorities who paved the way for this meeting and who have shown us such magnificent hospitality. God give us strength and guide us along the right path, for the greater good of mankind.