28. Coming to this rostrum for the first time to speak in the general debate, the delegation of the Republic of the Upper Volta would first of all like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to the Presidency of this Assembly, we are happy that an able and, experienced man, universally esteemed, has been, elected to conduct our proceedings. The Government of the Upper Volta offers you its congratulations. There is no doubt that under your competent guidance the problems exercising us will be discussed seriously and with particular care.
29. I shall not review every one of these problems. I shall simply state the views of the Government of the Republic of the Upper Volta on those which are the most important — namely, disarmament, the "cold war", and decolonization.
30. like all peoples, the people of the Upper Volta thirsts for peace. But the rattle of guns and the explosions of atomic bombs, polluting our atmosphere, do not speak the language of peace. Everyone knows how, with a great to-do, the Soviet Union resumed atomic tests last year. Despite the protest of the majority in this Assembly, it did not hesitate to explode the most powerful and noxious bomb ever made by man. It was obvious that after this step, as undesirable as it was untimely, the United States would also resume tests, so as not to be out-distanced by the Soviet Union.
31. Since then, atomic bombs have been bursting practically every day, like rotten eggs — underground, in the atmosphere, and in outer space; and because of fall-out the atmosphere's radioactivity is increasing. Monster, babies are being born in ever greater numbers, and it is hard to believe that all these monsters are solely the result of the new drug known as thalidomide. Our peoples, which watch the race into space and to the moon like spectators at a football match, are beginning to grow uneasy and to wonder whether the devices orbiting the earth, sometimes with an astronaut on board, are not on a mission of death as well as a mission of science, and do not represent a source of calamity for mankind. For this reason we shall spare no effort in working for rapid and complete disarmament.
32.	It is not true to say that the whole World wants disarmament. If it did, instead of there being squabbles over words and questions( of procedure, a solution would be found immediately.
33.	For its part the Upper Volta thinks that a comprehensive inventory should be drawn up of all nuclear weapons and their delivery vehicles after the signing of a treaty providing for an immediate halt to nuclear tests. Once these weapons had been enumerated under the supervision of a control mission on which the small and neutral countries were included, the weapons themselves would be collected on a public square and a magnificent bonfire would be made of them to celebrate peace. This is the only way in which we can be absolutely certain that all harmful weapons, their delivery vehicles and their means of production have really been destroyed.	
34., In the meantime, on the basis of personal experience, the Upper Volta publicly raises here the question of the indemnification of possible victims of all these devices which are sent into space without any precise knowledge of when and where, after their disintegration, their fragments are going to fall. In August 1962, at Fada N'Gourma in the Upper Volta, a mysterious object fell with the noise of a thunderclap and to the accompaniment of blinding flashes, all of which spread terror in the nearby villages. The point of impact is marked by a pit three metres long, dug by the force of the object's explosion. This object might have fallen on a school full of innocent children, on peaceful peasants at their market or on harmless administrative or business premises, killing hundreds of people and causing millions of francs worth of damage.
35.	Two explanations are possible. The object could have been a meteorite — in which case it would have been reported through Press, radio and television, there would have been talk of a natural calamity and its victims, kindly souls, would have become distressed, and presents: and gifts of every kind would have flowed into the Upper Volta, together with telegrams from all quarters expressing the sympathy of the entire world. But it might also have been a manmade contrivance, falling to earth either because of a technical defect or because it had come to the end of its "space life". Now we know today the two principal countries which are rich and powerful enough to be able to squander their money and exhibit their power in this dangerous game. Do you not think, then, that it would be just — after checking and expert examination — for responsibility for possible damage to be laid at the door of the country which had fathered these devices? Would it not be just for the countries adjudged responsible to pay compensation and make reparation to the country suffering from their enterprises? In any event, the Upper Volta raises this problem and will work with all men of goodwill to submit to this distinguished Assembly a resolution calling for provision to be made for reparations to countries which might be victims of this game of nuclear and space tests.
36.	Clearly, the arms race goes on furiously because since the end of the last war, the allies of yesterday have been competing for domination of the world.
37.	One side already held sway through its economic power, covering entire peoples with the heavy and stifling cloak of its imperialism. The other side wanted to start its rule through a new kind of imperialism, flavoured with a ideology which is meant to be enticing which it is trying to impose on the whole world by every possible means. This is the situation known as the "cold war", and it is sustained by both real and sham issues. The sham issues of the "cold war" are those which stress all the external aspects of the question without going to its roots.
38.	An example of the sham issues which sustain the /cold war" is the problem of Hungary, which comes before this Assembly regularly every year. In fact, we all know very well what happened at Budapest in 1956; we know that a people attempted to shake off the yoke of a regime it detested. We know that the hopes of this courageous and proud people had been, nourished and fostered, although it was common knowledge that since Potsdam and Yalta a new world had been born, in which there was no longer room for fine traditions of chivalry or for the keeping of promises.
39.	Thus, when the Russian tanks ground into the macadam of Budapest the flesh and bones of the Hungarian heroes who were desperately calling for help, it was found that the only help which could be sent consisted in fine words and tears of compassion. In 1939, a blank cheque given to Poland proved very expensive. In 1956, the blank cheque given to the Hungarian people was not covered at all,
40.	That being so, why press the matter further? A Government has assumed power; whatever one's opinion of that Government, it is the legitimate Government, since it controls the country and lays down the law there.
41.	For this reason the delegation of the Upper Volta voted against the inclusion of the question of Hungary in the agenda; for to debate the question, far from solving anything, will simply aggravate an already very bad and explosive situation.
42.	On the other hand, the people and Government of the Upper Volta stand solidly behind the peoples fighting for their liberty, the peoples which have been arbitrarily divided and which, because part of their country is still free, can claim from all Members of the United Nations the application, in their case, of what the United Nations Charter prescribes for all peoples — the right to democratic self-determination.
43.	Here I will merely mention the cases of the German and Korean peoples.
44.	It is true that Germany lost the war. But it is probably the first time in history that a war has been over for seventeen years without a treaty having been signed. Since the Hundred Years' War such a practice has rarely been seen in civilized countries.
45.	Certain earlier speakers have been most eloquent in denouncing the German revenge-seeking spirit, German warmongering, German militarism, and so forth and so on. In the first place, it is inelegant to attack a country which is absent and to accuse it when it has no way of defending itself against attack. Secondly, as everyone knows, Germany has been divided into two parts.
46.	In the East, the builders of paradise on earth went to work. In the West, work was resumed in the conviction that, since God expelled Adam and Eve from the earthly paradise, man could be sure only of his weakness and suffering.
47.	But what do we see today? Millions of people have fled from the so-called paradise of the East to go and live in the so-called hell of the West. We were told that this was false that there were no refugees, that it was all capitalist and imperialist propaganda designed to vilify a scientifically constructive socialism. In fact, to our great surprise, this socialist was soon constructing a concrete wall to divide Berlin in two. Contrary to all expectations, this was not to protect the socialist paradise against the illicit immigration of undesirable persons from the West. No this wall — which is also the wall  of truth — showed us that there was no paradise in the East. The wall was proof that the East preferred the regime of the West. Since then, this wall has been several times stained by the red blood of a martyr sacrificing himself to freedom in order that the world should know that, throughout the centuries, it is the barbarians who have always surrounded themselves with thick walls so as to conceal their outlandish and reprehensible proceedings.
48.	The whole people of the Upper Volta, unanimous behind its democratic Government, expresses its deep indignation at this wall of shame erected in Berlin; I repeat that, for the Upper Volta, the right solution of the Berlin question and of the German question as a whole lies in free, democratic self-determination, by vote of the sovereign people. Some speakers raise the problem of the de facto existence of two Germanys. The Berlin wall clearly shows that there is only one German people, and hence only one Germany; the long martyrdom of millions of refugees and the blood they have shed so generously in the path of their flight, strewn with heroic dead, reveal the way of truth and the course of the real Germany, the only Germany that counts.
49.	I mentioned the Korean question because, here again, the problem is one of defending freedom, and in this case the United Nations, with all the moral force of the Charter which governs our Organization, is involved.
50.	For what is it the Korean people wants-but peace and reunification? In Korea, too, it was claimed that the North was a paradise and the South a hell. Soon, however, more than 5 million of the blessed ones were throwing their haloes and wings to the communist winds and joining the reputedly damned ones in the South, The growing disparity between the populations of North and South Korea tells the real story.
51.	Let us not be told that the foreign troops stationed in Korea on the demarcation line of the neutral zone must leave the country. Is it not curious that Members of the United Nations should describe United Nations forces as foreign troops? In any event, the Korean people, which is a peace-loving people, regards those troops as the moral and material guarantee that its reunification, through the democratic process of an impartial popular referendum, will be supported by all nations of good will.	
52.	Since I am speaking of a problem in Asia, I shall briefly state my Government's views on the question of China.
53.	The legal aspect of the representation of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations is clear. Moreover, the United Nations cannot pretend that a country with nearly 700 million inhabitants does not exist. To close the door of the United Nations to certain countries would be to repudiate the universality of the Organization. What is more, if it is true that mainland China will soon seek membership in the atomic club, it becomes increasingly evident that no disarmament will be feasible without the participation of the country possessing the largest army in the world. All that is obvious.
54.	But if mainland China really wants to come into the United Nations as a co-operative Member, its admission depends entirely on its own attitude. Its leaders, likewise, have resolved to build a paradise on earth. We wish them luck, although we are told that they are encountering serious economic difficulties. Let them solve those difficulties, build their paradise on earth and stop alarming their neighbours.
55.	The people of nationalist China have a perfect right to live otherwise if they so-choose for there are instances in which divorce in a family is, not only tolerable, but admissible and acceptable. If the people of Formosa has chosen to live outside the paradise of the peoples' communes of communist China, if will never be deprived of that right of self-determination by a vote of the Upper Volta. That is why we regard the question of the admission of the People's Republic of China to the United Nations as really very important.
56.	I shall conclude my comments: on ''cold war" questions by referring to a problem which is another source of great anxiety — the problem of the Palestinian refugees.
57.	This problem is a false one which has dragged on long enough. It is one of those questions which must be resolved before the path to world peace can be cleared, because, as we all know, that part of the world is sitting on a powder-keg as dangerous as that of Berlin or Cuba. It is steadily becoming a fantastic arsenal replete with terrible menace. The parties confronting each other have learnt the lessons of the "cold war” so well that they speak its language to perfection. Let people test their rockets if they want to play that dangerous game. But when they tell us precisely where those rockets may fall, it is not very reassuring. Soviet-manufactured military jet planes with all kinds of armament cover whole areas, and the United States is supplying other defensive weapons.
58.	Here is an instance where reason should prevail. More than that. Here is a case for talking common sense. And what is Common sense? It is quite simple.
59.	The State of Israel exists. It is a Member of the United Nations. It is universally recognized, and many countries hold it in high esteem. It is very active in practical international co-operation. It is impossible to strike this State off the map of the world merely because a million Arab refugees are being intransigent on the subject of how they should receive compensation, for losses in property, to which they have a right.
60.	The great Powers are not likely to remain indifferent to a war in the Middle East between Israel and the Arab States, and we should soon find them pitted against each other through the immediate adversaries, as they have zealously managed to contrive thus far whenever even the mildest conflict has broken out anywhere in the world. Their zealousness in supplying arms should be enough to convince us that if such a conflict were to erupt in the Middle East, they would not remain on the side-lines.
61.	Moreover, anyone who knows the Middle East, its history and its intrigues must conclude that the disappearance of the State of Israel can only leave us with problems just as complicated and dangerous as those which we now face.
62.	Consequently the Government of the Upper Volta believes that we should significantly further the cause of world peace by exerting every effort to make the State of Israel and the Arab States sit around a table and discuss their problems with a view to negotiating a peaceful settlement in accordance with the fundamental principles of the Charter.
63.	The; Government of the Upper Volta welcomes the declaration, from this rostrum, by the Head of an African State having ties with the Arab worlds Prime Minister Ben Bella, Head of the Government of the newly independent Republic of Algeria — that his country has learnt from the experience of a long, seven-year war, that negotiation can settle many problems and alleviate the sufferings of peoples [1147th meeting]. For this reason I say, once again, that the problem of the Arab refugees is a false problem when stated as it usually is. Today it must be put concretely, in proper perspective, as it inevitably will be with the passing of the years, thus: the State of Israel and the Arab States must negotiate; the Middle East must be disarmed. Moreover, it is hard to see how those who, have demanded the denuclearization of Africa and, consequently, the disarmament of Africa can fail to favour the unsettling of all the booby-traps which in the Middle East, have been strewn on the path to peace.
64.	The Middle East has been the cradle of the two greatest religions in the world, and the source of many other divine appeals for brotherhood and peace. It would be a scandalous betrayal of the divine apostles of peace if it were sought to maintain a climate of war in that part of the world. I should like to congratulate Mrs. Golda Meir, Israel's Minister for Foreign Affairs, on her constant repetition from this rostrum of the proposal that the Middle East should be the place where genuine and complete disarmament might begin. This is a constructive proposal, which the Government of the Upper Volta endorses and which should be borne in mind by all who seek peace.
65.	I have stressed the problems which cause insecurity — that is, "cold war" matters — because we are now witnessing the phenomenon of decolonization, resulting in the birth of new peace-loving nations eager to build a new life. In this connexion I should like to congratulate Algeria, whose people has been heroic and magnificent in its relentless struggle for liberation and national independence. I would also like to congratulate France, which has displayed great courage and a true understanding of the realities of modern life in bringing about Algerian independence. On behalf of my Government, I should like to pay a special tribute to General de Gaulle. We had already said, here, that he was a man of his word and a man of great humanity, gifted with a keen intellect which enabled him accurately to assess the events of our time. His well-known historic speech of 16 September 1959, pledging self-determination for an Algerian Algeria, came soon after his return to power. Today, it is an accomplished fact: Algeria has expressed itself in favour of national independence; Algeria is Algerian, thanks to General de Gaulle.
66.	How bitterly we regret that side by side with these great men, measuring up to today's challenge to lead great peoples, there should in Europe be puny caricatures of statesmen, short-sighted dictators like the hysterical potentate who terrorizes Portugal and; seeing no farther than the tip of his nose, has made Angola into a hell on earth. There, his criminal hordes, seeking to preserve illegal and venal interests which are nothing more than intolerable usurpations, are daily massacring peaceful peoples whose only sin was that they demanded freedom to be Africans. If the licking so admirably given by India to the Portuguese Government in Goa has not cured that Government of its morbid delusions of grandeur, it should realize that the day is not far off when it will be expelled from Angola by the combined forces of all the outraged Africans. It is not even clear on whose behalf the Salazar Government is committing all these dreadful crimes. It is common knowledge that the Portuguese people itself hates its Government, curses its Prime Minister and is impatiently awaiting his imminent fail. I shall simply say that the days of Portuguese colonialism are numbered, everywhere in Africa — in Angola, in Mozambique, in so-called Portuguese Guinea, in the Cape Verde Islands, and in Sao Tome and Principe.
67.	The same applies to fascist Spain, which has illegally arrogated to itself the rights usurped from the peoples of Equatorial Guinea. No fragment of Africa shall remain in the rapacious claws of any colonialist. That is why we would advise the Power which holds the key to the problems of Rhodesia and Nyasaland to return to its tradition of wisdom. A flagrantly unjust system is being imposed on those countries, where the Africans are subjected to rule by the Whites. Blood has already begun to flow. I would have had much to say about this problem if a significant event had not occurred, enabling all of us to appraise the situation objectively. As you know, the representative of the United Kingdom in the Fourth Committee has resigned because the instructions of his Government were in serious conflict with his conscience. Now, this man is not just anybody. He comes of a distinguished family with a fine tradition of honesty and courage. He himself has had to settle a number of delicate situations during his career. He is one of the architects of peace in Cyprus, and subsequently of that country’s independence. Sir Hugh Foot did not resign from the United kingdom delegation at this session because he wanted to condemn his country; he resigned because he wished to sound the alarm with regard to the blind policy it was pursuing and because he did not want his country, through its own blunders, to condemn itself.
68.	It is not only the United Kingdom, Portugal and Spain which are still, either directly or through intermediaries, pursuing a colonial policy in Africa. South Africa can be added to the club. The representative of that country came to this rostrum with a guilty conscience; the proof that he had a guilty conscience is that he continually tried to justify his own sins by pointing to the faults of others. He accused other countries of racialism. He insinuated, for example, that that was the case with the United States and goodness knows how many others! I should like to point out to him the difference between the United States and South Africa. Certainly there is segregation in the United States; in certain parts of the country it is even very bad. But the United States Government has not given it institutional status; it does not boast about it; on the contrary, it vigorously combats it. In order that a young Negro can go to school it sends its judges legally and democratically to threaten a reactionary Governor with prison and make him pay forfeit on the spot. It sends its police to arrest an ex-general who is ignorant and limited in his ideas of human values. It sends troops to occupy the University of Mississippi to protect a Negro And disperse hysterical demonstrators. In a word, President Kennedy is a great President, conscious and respectful of human dignity and worthy to figure among the leaders of the free world.:
69.	If the people of South Africa were racialist and the Government tried to suppress apartheid, no one would blame it; on the contrary. But the Government of South Africa is limited in its views, its reasoning and its philosophy; it is that which is intolerable. Hence every time its Minister speaks here, despite all his efforts he will be defending a bad cause which is already lost. The speciousness of his arguments, shows, that his conscience is not clear. There will, however, be a separate debate on the truly pathological aberration of South Africa, and the Upper Volta reserves its right to speak on the subject at that time.
70.	Before concluding my remarks on decolonization, I should like to say a word shout New Guinea, In my Government's opinion the Agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and the Kingdom of the Netherlands concerning West New Guinea (West Irian) [see A/5170, annex] is invalid, since the interested party has not been consulted and in fact has been ignored. I solemnly protest against this Agreement. I also declare that in this specific case my Government is not defending a colonialist thesis, we have never taken the side of the Netherlands. We have always understood that it was our duty to defend the Papuans, The Papuans are not Indonesians. The same reasons which justified the Indonesians in demanding the departure of the Dutch, because the Dutch are not Indonesians, require that the Papuans should not be handed over to the Indonesians, since they too are not Indonesians.
71.	The very fact that the Republic of Indonesia has agreed in principle to a referendum proves that it implicitly recognizes the existence of an ethnic entity, which, in its view, ought to decide in favour of Indonesia. My Government cannot believe in the impartiality of a referendum which is to take place in 1969, when the party directly concerned will have been administering New Guinea for five years.
72.	Hence I declare here that it is Indonesia which is the colonialist and which has, moreover, resorted to blackmail in the form of a threat of war, and to the "cold war" in order to achieve its ends.
73.	My delegation, by abstaining in the vote on the question [1127th meeting], wished to indicate its reservations regarding the effectiveness of the action of the United Nations in that country, when the Organization's proper role in accordance with the Charter would have been to administer the country until the referendum was held. In New Guinea, Indonesia has betrayed the sacred principles of the Bandung Conference, which have always been a source of Strength to us.
74.	There is also the problem of the Congo. In this case my Government entirely approves the U Thant plan. It is indeed time that Mr. Tshombé; to use a vulgar phrase, stopped "trying to be funny". The time has come for him to break off his friendships and his associations which are dangerous for Africa, such as his friendship with racialist South Africa and with the self-styled Federal Government of the so-called Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The Government of the Upper Volta approves, in advance, all the vigorous steps that will have to be taken to strengthen the Congolese Central Government and the unity of the country.
75.	Much has been said about the "crisis of the United Nations". It is not surprising that there should be a United Nations crisis, since some of its Members are acting exactly like the lunatic who, sitting astride the branch of a tree, is furiously sawing it off at the trunk while shouting to the four winds "stand from under!”.
76.	An objective examination of the question, however, shows that there will be. no scapegoat. The African-Asian group has acted in conformity with history and with its vocation. For that reason the world is in most advantageous posture for the inauguration of true co-operation between the nations. The activities of the African-Asian group have purified and reformed the closed and therefore impotent club constituted by the United Nations of San Francisco. An objective examination of the question shows that those who are undermining the prestige of the United Nations are those who, for undisclosed reasons, refuse to participate honestly in the responsibilities they should bear for the Organizations various operations. The United Nations would not be in a dangerous or critical situation if the Soviet Union agreed to pay its share of the Congo expenses, for example; there would be no United Nations crisis if South Africa restored South West Africa, which it has stolen to the Organization, and if it decided to abide by the principles of the Charter in its governmental policy instead of trying to transform the United Nations into a club ruled by complicity and compromise; there would be no United Nations crisis if Portugal ended the criminal massacres in Angola; there would be no United Nations crisis if the Arab States agreed to meet the State of Israel for a discussion of their differences, so as to settle them by negotiation; there would be no United Nations crisis if the peoples' right to self-determination was scrupulously respected, and if the Organization were not compromised by dubious operations like the agreement on West New Guinea; there would be no United Nations crisis if the Korean people and the German people were allowed to hold plebiscites; there would be no United Nations crisis if the United Kingdom were to revert honourably to democratic practices in the Rhodesias. Lastly, there would be no United Nations crisis if the United States and the Soviet Union decided to comply with the resolutions requesting them to cease atomic testing immediately and to disarm without delay.
77.	 It is not because the small countries, which are longing for peace and justice, scatter denunciations at the United Nations that there is a United Nations crisis; it is because the great nations consistently refuse to listen to those countries.
78.	The Government of the Upper Volta, while refusing to. join any bloc, and indeed because it refuses to be aligned, undertakes to defend the sacred principles of justice and freedom wherever they may be threatened.
79.	Our independence is not an accident which can tempt us into complacency and thoughtlessness. Our independence was deliberate and conscious; for us it is a magnificent instrument. For this reason we have not been infected by that childish illness of independence which consist sin fraternizing recklessly, and indiscriminately with everyone, without reflecting whether what is involved is positive international cooperation or irresponsible propaganda in a world in which our responsibilities are limited. We do not enter into relations with any country unless we are ready to co-operate with it fruitfully for peace, without ambiguity. The Upper Volta, thank God, is still free to organize its international life as it wishes, and will always defend that freedom.
80.	. Various speakers here have assumed the mantle of directors of conscience, or shepherds, and have addressed warning cries of "wolf, wolf!” to the African countries which have opted, for association with the Common Market. Let there be no illusions on either side. Our countries are no longer children who can be frightened with old wives tales and bugaboos. We shall continue to be associated with the Common Market as long as it suits us. I say "associated”, advisedly, for words have their meaning. The word "association”, clearly indicates a share in the activities ties and responsibilities of the operation. We do not need directors of conscience, or guardian angels, to tell us what is good for us and what is not. Everyone should realize that. This awareness of our responsibilities compels us to advocate African unity.
81.	The Government of the Upper Volta was glad when the illustrious. leader of democratic Guinea — a great African, respected throughout the continent stated here a few days ago [1148th meeting] that the achievement of African unity did not mean that the small nations, the small African countries, must quarrel among themselves, as the imperialists and colonialists of all kinds have always hoped that they would. President Sekou Touré, when stating here what he has always thought, at the same time expressed with great eloquence what has always been the profound conviction of his African brothers who, like him are responsible to peoples that they must lead to the great gathering of African democracy. When the eminent leader of Guinea emphatically stated from this rostrum that Africa had no need of imported ideologies and doctrines, he was speaking as the true spokesman of, Africa today, whose own personality must develop and express itself in contributions to world civilization. No one was more qualified than he to do so.
82.	My Government hopes that the colonialists and imperialists have taken note, and are thus warned, that on the day of the great gathering for African unity which is not far distant there will not be a square inch of ground on which they can carry out their mischievous and sordid attempts to divide us.
83.	This is how the Government of the Upper Volta views the various problems of the present-day world.