In spite of deep conflicts of political interests between nations, in spite of differences in race, religion, culture and nationality, mankind has overriding and vital common interests. It is the great task of the United Nations, in this epoch of history, to translate this common interest into action. It is my ardent hope that a profound consciousness of our responsibilities for this task may be reflected in the debates of this seventeenth General Assembly,
47.	We should concentrate on areas in which concrete action for peace and "detente" can be instituted. If we fail in this, we shall be failing in our duties and our responsibilities for that community of man which is greater than any selfish interests and transcends all that divides us.
48.	To maintain international peace and security is the primary aim of the United Nations. In present conditions this means that the disarmament problem is the most burning issue of our time.
49.	For the first time in history a military apparatus exists which is technically capable of annihilating mankind or, at any rate, all forms of civilized life. We have gradually grown accustomed to living with this knowledge, but it is difficult to escape a feeling that an uncontrolled arms race cannot go on indefinitely without some day ending in disaster. Across all national and ideological frontiers there is an elementary and fundamental common interest in preventing this.
50.	The Disarmament Conference at Geneva, which will be resumed in a few weeks’ time, has gone into all the aspects of the disarmament issue. It is true that the Geneva negotiations have not yet resulted in concrete agreements, but they have been realistic and constructive. The neutral countries have contributed substantially to the endeavours to bridge the gap between the conflicting positions.
51.	These negotiations, and the detailed scientific studies which have been carried out, have served to elucidate further the very complex problems raised by disarmament. On a number of problems the opposing views have come closer together. In several fields virtual agreement seems to have been reached. Our discussions during this general debate should aim at laying the best possible foundation for the continued negotiations at Geneva.
52.	The goal must be general and complete disarmament under international control. On this we all agree. But in the present international situation it would be of capital importance if agreement could be reached on rapid implementation of certain initial and partial measures of disarmament designed to promote international security and pave the way for more comprehensive agreements. What is decisive is to make a start with disarmament, to get out of the vicious circle where mutual distrust leads to an arms race, which leads to added distrust which, in turn, leads to even greater armaments. We should try to start the good circle where minor progress on specific points may alleviate international tensions. One such limited but important step would be to take measures to prevent the dissemination of independent nuclear capabilities. This is a key problem of today. The world of the sixties and the seventies will be dangerous to live in if more and more countries acquire independent nuclear armaments.
53.	But the most immediate problem is, in my Government's view the need to arrive at an early agreement on a nuclear test ban. The recent report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation [A/5216] has shed more light on the sinister radiation hazards involved in these tests. It is desirable from every point of view that these tests should be stopped as soon as possible in order to eliminate the biological and genetic risks from fall-out, in order to prevent wider dissemination of nuclear weapons and in order to halt the nuclear arms race.
54.	In an attempt to meet the Soviet views, the Western atomic Powers at the Geneva Conference have now declared themselves ready to accept an agreement on an immediate ban on all nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and in the oceans, without any form of international inspection on Soviet territory. They only call for a minimum of international control as a condition for widening the test ban to include underground tests which are not detectable by scientific devices in other countries. In other words, an agreement on a self-policing stop could be concluded tomorrow for those categories of nuclear tests which produce the dangerous fall-out. It seems to us that this compromise proposal represents a constructive contribution to a solution. It will simply be impossible to understand if, being so near to a solution, we now fail to solve this problem of such tremendous importance to mankind.
55.	Disarmament is, as the Acting Secretary-General says in his annual report [A/5201/Add.1], a subject in which all nations, big and small, are concerned. We all have a responsibility, also to future generations. In the same way as Denmark takes part in the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations in the Middle East and the Congo, we are ready, within our limited possibilities, to contribute scientifically and technically, with equipment and personnel, to the implementation of any disarmament programme on which agreement may be reached. Now, as before, Denmark is ready to make a direct and practical contribution to the solution of the disarmament problem.
56.	Progress towards disarmament is intimately bound up with the efforts we make to promote international "detente" and mutual trust. It is a paramount task of the United Nations to make an effective contribution to the settlement of international crises and conflicts.
57.	I am glad to have this opportunity to pay tribute to the Acting Secretary-General for his constructive efforts to bring about reconciliation in the Congo and assist the Congolese people in solving their constitutional, political and economic problems. My country whole-heartedly supports the Congo operation of the United Nations and, in our view, the Secretary-General's conciliation plan is a reasonable and realistic basis for a lasting solution of the Congo problem. It is essential that the Secretary-General should have wide support for the accomplishment of this task, for the sake of the Congolese people and for the sake of the authority of the United Nations and the future possibilities of the Organization as a peace-preserving factor.
58.	Since we met here last year, the international situation has shown some encouraging features — for instance, the agreements on Algeria and Laos. But at the same time it is a regrettable fact and a source of concern that the Berlin situation is still tense. An arrangement which could eliminate the tensions surrounding the Berlin issue and which, at the same time, could safeguard the freedom and security of, as well as free access to, West Berlin would help materially to improve the international climate. This would also pave the way for positive results from the disarmament negotiations. The idea of assigning a role to the United Nations by moving some United Nations organ to Berlin should enter into the deliberations.
59.	Since the Second World War, we have witnessed a gradual abolition of colonial systems of former times, which has led to the emancipation of vast areas and hundreds of millions of people. The United Nations has played an important role in these developments, which have the warm sympathy and full support of the Danish people and which represent one of the greatest advances of the twentieth century. We have now reached a stage where the colonial issue will soon be a thing of the past, but the racial policies pursued by certain States is a bitter and immediate reality. I am thinking, for instance, of the apartheid policy of the Republic of South Africa, which reflects a contempt for the dignity of man which we can never accept.
60.	It is our obligation to defend fundamental human rights wherever they are violated or threatened. National independence and political liberty are, however, not in themselves sufficient to ensure proper living conditions for the peoples of the emerging independent nations. Two-thirds of the inhabitants of this earth suffer from poverty and misery. The difference in living standards between the more and the less developed countries is growing. This widening gap will jeopardize the foundation of peace.
61.	It is my impression that it is generally realized that the aim of assistance to developing countries should be to help them develop their own natural and human resources in order to win the struggle against hunger, disease and illiteracy. Education is the core of technical assistance. But, if education is to produce quick results, it must be backed up by efforts to accelerate the early phases of capital formation in developing countries.
62.	Denmark regards technical assistance as an international task of historic significance, and the Danish Government gives unreserved support to the United Nations Development Decade. By far the greater share of Denmark's contribution is channelled through the United Nations. Our contributions to the United Nations aid programmes — already among the biggest on a per caput basis — have lately been increased substantially. Appropriations for bilateral assistance — which may be preferable in specific situations — will also be raised, and our future bilateral activities will be co-ordinated with the assistance programmes under United Nations auspices. In our view, the special significance of bilateral programmes lies in the fact that this form of assistance is particularly suited to promoting interest in assistance activities among the population of the contributing country. For technical assistance is a human task in which the efforts of Governments must rest on the whole-hearted understanding and active participation of peoples.
63.	The long-term economic problem of the developing countries is to create a diversified economy. Only this will enable these countries to become equal partners in the international exchange of goods and services. But we also realize that the acute trade problems of the developing countries must be solved, and we believe that regional trade co-operation, based on liberal and outward-looking principles, will lead to greater exports for the developing countries. Contributions to the solution of these problems should also be made by such international organizations as the International Monetary Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The Danish Government hopes that the international conference on trade and development which the Economic and Social Council decided should be held [resolution 917 (XXXIV)] may mark an important step forward. It is essential, therefore, that the conference should be prepared with the greatest possible care.
64.	In all the fields I have mentioned — disarmament and arms control, settlement of conflicts, decolonization, and assistance to developing countries — there are concrete opportunities for constructive action by the United Nations. In order to cope with all these tasks it is, however, essential that the United Nations should have the full support of the Member countries. In the financial crisis in which the United Nations now finds itself this means, above all, that Member countries must make available the funds required to meet the expenses of the Organization. Only when the international Secretariat can operate effectively will the Organization be able to take action whenever and wherever this may be necessary to uphold the principles of the Charter. It is for this very reason — because we want to preserve the United Nations as an effective peace-preserving factor — that Denmark is against the so-called "troika" system.
65.	In our view the importance of the United Nations will be further enhanced and world-wide co-operation promoted if the principle of universality of membership is applied fully. For this reason we continue to support the representation of the People's Republic of China.
66.	It is an overriding purpose of the Danish Government and the Danish people to do everything in our power to strengthen the United Nations. That is why we take an active part in the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations and make relatively considerable contributions to the Organization's assistance activities and its bond issue. The small nations have a vital interest in supporting the authority of the United Nations and its development towards becoming an effective instrument for the rule of law.
67.	In a world of tension and conflict the United Nations carried humanity's best hope for peace.
