Mr. President, in addition to the many tributes which have been so eloquently paid to you, I would like to offer you, in my turn, on behalf of the Royal Government and the people of Laos, my warmest and most sincere congratulations on the occasion of your election as President of the seventeenth session of the General Assembly. We are convinced that, through your wisdom, your qualities, your breadth of vision, and great competence — in international law in particular — you will lead the work of the United Nations to a successful conclusion.
127.	May I also be permitted to welcome, on behalf of the people of Laos, the representatives of the four countries which have just been admitted to the United Nations. Their admission is an important event which is worthy of special attention, as, in faithfully matching its membership each year to the realities of the international situation, the United Nations comes nearer and nearer to universality. This new raising of the status of countries which were still colonies yesterday is no more than the justification of their struggle for liberty and consummation of their legitimate ambitions of independence. We which these new Member States a peaceful and prosperous future.
128.	In spite of the state of tension which persists in international relations, and despite the only too familiar atmosphere of the Cold War, this session is commencing its work in a relatively peaceful international climate. The year which has just passed has been marked by the elimination of several trouble-spots. In North Africa, Algeria has won its independence after a bitter war lasting seven years, and my delegation is overjoyed to think that an independent Algeria will be taking its place amongst us in a few days.
129.	In New Guinea, the agreement between Indonesia and the Netherlands [A/5170] has put an end to a thirteen-year old dispute which had threatened on several occasions to deteriorate into a large-scale conflict.
130.	In the Congo, attempts have been made during the past few months, notably by the Acting Secretary- General of the United Nations, U Thant, to bring about a final settlement of the Congo imbroglio, but to our regret, direct or veiled foreign interference has held up the solution of this problem. Nevertheless, recent developments would seem to open up fresh prospects of peace for the Congo. I hope that these prospects will soon become a reality, and that all those who can exert any influence, in no matter what connexion, will give their sincere help in finally barring the way to foreign interference, so that this country, which has been torn by strife for so long, can be made into an independent and prosperous nation.
131.	In our own country, the internal conflicts which were fanned by the wind of foreign interference have now died out as a result of the compromise reached at the Geneva conference. Thus, the atmosphere which was poisoned with hatred and bitterness and anxiety and doubts kept alive by the flames of conflict has now gradually cleared, creating suitable conditions, first for a compromise, and later for a gradual understanding. Unfortunately, this relaxation of international tension is not general. The old quarrels, the settlement of which has been put off so many times, are once more on our agenda, and the old sores are ready to burst open at the slightest rise in international tension. Disarmament, Berlin, the Congo, Korea, colonialism — these questions, which have been debated on several occasions and which stir up passion and acrimony each time they are considered by the General Assembly, may at any moment develop "bouts of fever" and put international peace and security to a severe test.
132.	Speaking of international co-operation, my delegation is in favour of any moves for the equitable development of international trade, as such trade is the sine qua non of international life in our days, when autarky is no longer possible. We are convinced that prosperous international trade, in which great and small nations alike could participate under the same conditions and without any discrimination, would be an effective contribution to the upholding of peace. It is essential that there should reign in this family of nations a true state of equality whereby the scantily-industrialized countries can trade freely on an equal footing with their more powerful and more industrially advanced partners. A multilateral international agreement, preferably under the auspices of the United Nations, is highly desirable for the benefit of all.
133.	After several years of tragic strife and fratricidal struggle, the Kingdom of Laos has just turned over a fresh page in its history. The agreements of July 23rd last, in which the neutrality, independence and unity of Laos were recognized, and which were the result of our righteous and strenuous struggle and the fruit of co-operation between peace-loving Powers, have generated a great wave of approval and relief in our country. Those agreements, by putting an end to foreign intervention in all its forms, marked the achievement of national reconciliation.
134.	I do not need to remind you at length from this platform that Laos, which has been a victim of foreign interference, has known the horrors of war. For twenty years, the people of Laos have known neither true peace nor even the respite of a ceasefire. Foreign arms have been poured into our country in spite of us. Nevertheless, the people of Laos, no matter what their political convictions, wish only to live in peace and keep their little country strictly neutral. That is the only way to avoid foreign covetousness and conquest. Neutrality is implicit not only in the geographical situation of our country, but also in our people's traditions of peace. Laos intends henceforth to remain a land of tolerance and peaceful co-existence. The Agreement signed on 23 July 1962 at Geneva consists of two documents which form a whole. The statement on the neutrality of Laos which is incorporated in the thirteen-Power Declaration and refers to the solemn undertaking entered into by the Royal Government of Laos to follow the path of peace and neutrality contains eight important points which, with the President's permission, I shall proceed to enumerate: "The Royal Government of Laos ... solemnly declares that: "1. It will resolutely apply the five principles of peaceful coexistence in foreign relations, and will develop friendly relations and establish diplomatic relations with all countries, the neighbouring countries first and foremost, on the basis of equality and of respect for the independence and sovereignty of Laos; "2. It is the will of the Laotian people to protect and ensure respect for the sovereignty, independence, neutrality, unity, and territorial integrity of Laos; "3. It will not resort to the use or threat of force in any way which might impair the peace of other countries, and will not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries; "4. It will not enter into any military alliance or into any agreement, whether military or otherwise, which is Inconsistent with the neutrality of the Kingdom of Laos; it will not allow the establishment of any foreign military base on Laotian territory, nor allow any country to use Laotian territory for military purposes or for the purposes of Interference in the internal affairs of other countries, nor recognize the protection of any alliance or military coalition, including SEATO (Southeast Asia Treaty Organization); "5. It will not allow any foreign interference in the internal affairs of the Kingdom of Laos in any form whatsoever; "6. Subject to the provisions of Article 5 of the Protocol, it will require the withdrawal from Laos of all foreign troops and military personnel, and will not allow any foreign troops or military personnel to be Introduced into Laos; "7. It will accept direct and unconditional aid from all countries that wish to help the Kingdom of Laos build up an independent and autonomous national economy on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of Laos; "8. It will respect the treaties and agreements signed in conformity with the interests of the Laotian people and of the policy of peace and neutrality of the Kingdom, in particular the Geneva Agreements of 1962, and will abrogate all treaties and agreements which are contrary to those principles."
135.	I would like to point out that this statement of neutrality by the Royal Government of Laos will be promulgated constitutionally and will have the force of law.
136. In response to his solemn statement by the Royal Government, the thirteen Powers participating in the International Conference on the Settlement of the Laotian Question have, in their turn, entered into the following undertakings: "1. They will not commit or participate in any way in any act which might directly or indirectly impair the sovereignty, independence, neutrality, unity, or territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Laos; "2. They will not resort to the use or threat of force or any other measure which might impair the peace of the Kingdom of Laos; "3. They will refrain from all direct or indirect interference in the internal affairs of the Kingdom of Laos; "4. They will not attach conditions of a political nature to any assistance which they may offer or which the Kingdom of Laos may seek; "5. They will not bring the Kingdom of Laos in any way into any military alliance or any other agreement, whether military or otherwise, which is inconsistent with her neutrality, nor invite or encourage her to enter into any such alliance or to conclude any such agreement; "6, They will respect the wish of the Kingdom of Laos not to recognize the protection of any alliance or military coalition, including SEATO; "7. They will not introduce into the Kingdom of Laos foreign troops or military personnel in any form whatsoever, nor will they in any way facilitate or connive at the introduction of any foreign troops or military personnel; "8. They will not establish nor will they in any way facilitate or connive at the establishment in the Kingdom of Laos of any foreign military base, foreign strong point or other foreign military installation of any kind; "9. They will not use the territory of the Kingdom of Laos for interference in the internal affairs of other countries; "10. They will not use the territory of any country, including their own, for interference in the internal affairs of the Kingdom of Laos."
137,	Furthermore, they "appeal to all other States to recognize, respect and observe in every way the sovereignty, independence and neutrality, and also the unity and territorial integrity, of the Kingdom of Laos and to refrain from any action inconsistent with these principles or with other provisions of the... [thirteen-Power] Declaration".
138.	They also decided that the withdrawal of all foreign troops and foreign military personnel, to be carried out under the surveillance of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Laos, composed of India, Canada and Poland, should be concluded by 6 October 1962. Thus if all the Powers will scrupulously apply the Agreement of 23 July 1962 without reticence or mental reservations, the Kingdom of Laos will be freed from the spectre of foreign interference and will truly become a neutral, independent and sovereign country. It will then be able to devote itself to specifically national works in order to rebuild its ruins, dress its wounds, settle its economy and start afresh towards a peaceful and prosperous future. On several occasions the Royal Government has proclaimed its wish — for it is in its own interest — to apply this agreement fully and sincerely, and I reiterate today from this rostrum our unshakable determination to do so. We shall do everything in our power to ensure that the work done at Geneva may rest on a firm foundation. I hope, in turn, that all the signatory Powers will apply and respect, without reservation, the agreement which has just been concluded. There is certainly no doubt that special responsibility lies with the great Powers.
139.	It gives me much pleasure to pay a sincere tribute, on behalf of the people and Government of Laos, to H.R.H, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Head of the State of Cambodia, whose apt initiative at the Conference made it possible to bring peace and neutrality to Laos. I wish also to thank all the countries which took part in the Conference for their patient efforts throughout the fourteen months of negotiations and for the understanding and sympathy they showed in seeking a peaceful settlement for so complex and difficult a problem.
140.	That is why, after this almost unique experience, we are more than ever in favour of the peaceful settlement of international disputes, whatever their scope and gravity. We firmly believe in the merit of human contacts and of peace negotiations. My delegation does not claim to have an exclusive recipe for the settlement of all international problems or disputes, but we have noted in the past that a large number of them have been settled, either within the United Nations or outside the Organization, through recourse to direct and frank negotiations. Current problems must be solved, in our view, through understanding and reciprocal goodwill and not through violence, hatred and bloodshed. For our part, we shall continue to solve our Internal difficulties, and indeed our international difficulties, by the same methods, on the basis of an impartial and objective consideration of the facts and inspired by the principles of law, justice and good faith.
141.	The Kingdom of Laos does not, in accepting new friendships, reject its older ones, it does, however, place its devotion and loyalty to the principles of independence, national sovereignty and neutrality which will henceforth govern its national life above its personal preferences and affinities. There is no possibility of compromise or bargaining where respect for our national sovereignty is concerned. Out foreign policy is not and will not be marked by any feelings of hostility towards any country of group of countries which respects our principles. We are determined to reach an understanding and establish friendly relations with all countries which so desire, on the basis of mutual respect and equality and irrespective of their social or political systems. We are prepared to accept any foreign assistance which is not accompanied by political conditions that might jeopardize our neutrality.
142.	It was with this desire for equity and this appreciation of realities that my Government recently decided to establish diplomatic relations with various countries, among them the Government of the People's Republic of China. This recognition was due not only to the active and effective participation of that Government in the recent settlement of our problem but also to a proper estimation of realities. It was but a corollary of the strict application of our policy of neutrality. We consider that a great people numbering 650 million, with all its economic and military potential, cannot long be excluded from international life. The restoration of its rights in the United Nations must in our view come about as quickly as possible, for that might contribute usefully to the consolidation of peace and the reduction of world tension.
143.	My delegation hopes that we can make room in our Organization for all countries which show a desire for peace and that we can finally reject the distinction which some make between the notion of admitting a State and that of recognizing it.
144.	With respect to the proposal advanced by H.R.H. Prince Sihanouk regarding the neutralization of Cambodia, my Government both endorses the proposal and fully supports the idea of convening an international conference on the matter. It is also prepared to adopt any other procedure which Cambodia considers adequate as a means of hastening or facilitating its entry upon a course of guaranteed neutrality. An enlarged neutral zone in South-East Asia. Where war still rages, cannot but aid the development and strengthening of international peace and security in that part of the world.
145.	In our opinion it is not a question of displacing hotbeds of war from north to south. It is a question of completely extinguishing them by putting an immediate end to foreign intervention. The continuance or harmful extension of foreign interference represents a serious threat to peace and invites the danger that South-East Asia might at any moment be set ablaze. The teachings of history have amply demonstrated that at all times and places nothing can defeat the will of a people battling for its freedom.
146.	Today there is no responsible Head of State who does not know that in the age of weapons of mass destruction war is an absurdity which can solve nothing and which would destroy with equal ferocity the two contending camps. My country, which has experienced suffering and destruction, has always been an advocate of general and complete disarmament. All weapons, whether conventional or nuclear must be outlawed, for there is no possible alternative to peace. We shall also support, as we have for years, the permanent cessation of nuclear testing underground, underwater and in the atmosphere.
147.	The rapid development of the technology of death and destruction should not in our opinion be considered a positive achievement of civilization. What is the good of the immense amount of work done by man if it is only to bring mankind to an end? The fabulous sums of money spent to develop the techniques of collective suicide should be diverted towards fulfilling the purposes of the Charter by combating hunger, ignorance and disease.
148.	My country wishes to stress once more that it will continue to give its support, within its limited means, to all peoples fighting for their freedom. Colonialism, whether overt or covert, thrives on the ignorance and humiliation of the weaker peoples. It must disappear from the face of the earth, giving way to a new form of co-operation based on equality and mutual respect. It is only by uniting our efforts to wipe out this scourge that we will be able to prepare for peace and give real expression to the spirit of the Charter.
149.	These are the principles which guide the Royal Government of national unity presided over by His Highness, Prince Souvanna Phouma. Jealous of our sovereignty, we do not propose to compromise or sacrifice our neutrality for any illusions or for any momentary tactical or ideological considerations.
150.	We come to this meeting our hearts filled with hope. We trust that this seventeenth session of the General Assembly will be one of rapprochement, of concord and of peace.
