It is a great pleasure and a distinguished honour, on behalf of the delegation of Liberia and myself, to extend sincere congratulations to the President, Mr. Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventeenth session. We feel certain that in the exercise of his heavy responsibilities he will bring to bear on our deliberations his extraordinary and rich experience, his keen sense of justice and his wisdom.
2.	The expansion of the United Nations membership is, in the opinion of the delegation of Liberia, of great importance for the Organization's role in the maintenance of international peace and security. By such expansion, the United Nations moves much closer to being the universal organization it was intended to be. It is thus a source of gratification to my delegation to extend a very warm welcome to Rwanda, Burundi, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago into the family of this world Organization. We are certain that these new States will make a significant and constructive contribution to the objectives of the United Nations and assist in establishing it as a centre for harmonizing the actions of States in the attainment of the principles and purposes of the Organization.
3.	Each year seems to bring with it many critical and crucial problems for which solutions need to be found by this world Organization. To find solutions requires the will and determination of Member States and a new approach, free from bias and prejudice. We should focus our attention on the main objective — the peace of the world — and we should resolve to search for fair and just solutions. No one wants to think of the horrible alternative which might stare us in the face if we failed in our efforts to achieve peace.
4.	It is a source of some satisfaction that agreement was finally reached and a declaration signed at Geneva on 10 July establishing a government of national unity in Laos. Let us hope that the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Laos will be able to ensure a stable and peaceful situation in that country.
5.	We are indeed happy, also, that the situation in New Guinea has been settled and that the people of that country will eventually exercise their right of self-determination. We congratulate the Acting Secretary-General on the part he has played in bringing about a peaceful solution.
6.	Although the principal parties to the issue of Berlin, which is a dangerous area of tension, have accepted the principle of negotiation, the fact remains that there appears to be no reduction of tension and we are still far away from a solution of that problem. It is extremely doubtful that this question can be satisfactorily settled except by the unification of Germany, something which can be effected only with the free and unfettered participation of the German people.
7.	My delegation does not accept the theory that there should be negotiation merely for the sake of negotiation; nor does it accept the theory that there should be prospects of success before negotiation begins. Negotiations in good faith may help to expose areas, limited though they may be, where there may be the possibility of compromise. The Liberian Government is prepared to support any measure, within or without the United Nations, which may bring the contending parties together to find a reasonable and equitable solution.
8.	The voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing by the big Powers was broken last year while the nuclear Powers were still holding discussions on a test ban; and now two of them are carrying on a series of tests in what they have described as their national interests. We appear to be moving in a vicious circle; and there is still a deadlock in the test ban negotiations. We are pleased at the efforts to bring the two sides together which are being made by non-nuclear countries in the negotiations. But the progress that has been made in the past year is, to say the least, not as satisfactory as we should like, The people of the world abhor being continuously exposed to radio-active fall-out, and we have been recently warned by a committee of scientists of the harmful effects of atomic radiation. We wish our children and generations yet unborn to live and make contributions to the improvement of life on our planet. We have been treated to numerous peace festivals and similar conferences, where we have heard many resolutions. What the world wants now is peace action, not peace talk. I hope that this session of the Assembly can help the nuclear Powers to take the essential first step towards general disarmament by signing a nuclear test ban treaty.
9.	In spite of the provisions of the Charter on disarmament and the regulation of armaments, no agreement in this field has yet been reached. The cold war has been largely responsible, but the two principal sides seem to be insisting on iron-clad guarantees for their present positions. Modern weapons threaten our very existence. No effort should be spared and no ingenuity should be left untaxed in trying to find a solution to the problem of disarmament. Disarmament will not prove to be a panacea, but I believe it will be a significant and important advance in our efforts to reduce tension and find peaceful solutions to world problems. That is our task and our challenge, especially in this age when we are haunted by mutilation, if not annihilation. Our prime interest should be human survival in freedom and justice, not mass human destruction.
10.	At the sixteenth session of the General Assembly the problem of finding a successor to the late Dag Hammarskjold was temporarily resolved by the interim appointment of Acting Secretary-General U Thant to fill the unexpired term. He has served well and efficiently, and my Government has been greatly impressed by his performance. We feel that this should weigh heavily in his favour for election to a full term.
11.	For the past two years we have been beset by the proposal for an executive triumvirate, or "troika”. In the past two sessions I have expressed by Government's disagreement with this formula, which cannot be applied without amending the Charter. At the United Nations Conference on International Organization we accepted the principle that the Secretary-General and the staff of this Organization should be independent and therefore free from the pressures of Governments. The change now being proposed would make the Secretariat an inter-governmental organization, which would easily be subjected to tremendous pressures. This strikes at the very heart of the Organization as a whole.
12.	The Liberian Government has agreed to and has fully supported the principle of an independent Secretariat, and believes in its effectiveness. To sacrifice it would be too costly, in our opinion, and might even be fatal to the continued existence of the Organization itself.
13.	Besides, if we agree to the "troika", who can tell that we shall be able to stop there? Once the principle of dividing up the Secretariat among the different groupings in the Assembly is accepted, we may find ourselves urged in a year or two to advance from the "troika" to the four-in-hand, in order to recognize the rights of some newly organized bloc of delegations. Before long, indeed, the Secretary-General might find himself trying to control with one rein a whole regiment of cavalry. He would then be able to match the feat of the Stephen Leacock character, who leapt upon his steed and rode madly off in all directions.
14.	The desire of my Government is not to enervate or weaken the United Nations, but to give it greater strength and vitality as one of the most useful instruments of diplomacy in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
15.	The United Nations is undergoing a financial crisis due mainly to the failure of some Members to contribute to the enormous costs incurred by its peace-keeping operations in the Middle East and the Congo. Some delegations have invoked all kinds of arguments which, they contend, make it impossible for them to pay their assessments. My delegation regards such arguments as mere excuses and ruses. We believe that such acts are deliberately designed to cause financial strangulation of the Organization and to bring pressures to get a point of view adopted which has been lost either in the General Assembly or the Security Council.
16.	There has never been any doubt in my mind that, since United Nations organs authorized the United Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East and the United Nations Operation in the Congo, all Members of the United Nations are obligated to bear the expenses. Speaking at the last session of the General Assembly on this matter I said: "It is quite obvious then that when decisions are made by the Security Council bearing on the maintenance of peace and security, or if the Security Council is unable to make a decision and the matter is referred to the General Assembly where the decision is made, if any financial involvement of the Organization becomes necessary it is the obligation of each Member of the United Nations to contribute its share, once that has been determined, in meeting the expenses which are to be incurred. "It is wrong for any Member of the United Nations to refuse to make its contribution on any ground whatsoever; for when either the Security Council or the General Assembly takes an action it does so on behalf of each Member, and we are all obligated because we have conferred on these institutions the power to take action in our behalf,.[1017th meeting, para. 29], Continuing, I said: "My delegation feels that the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations are an obligation of Members and, therefore, the expenses thereof should be apportioned by the General Assembly in keeping with Article 17, paragraph 2 of the Charter." [Ibid. para. 31.]
17.	For these reasons the Liberian delegation cosponsored the resolution [1731 (XVI)] referring this question to the International Court of Justice. It is therefore with satisfaction and great joy that my Government accepts the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice [A/5161] that the expenditures authorized by the General Assembly to cover the cost of ONUC and UNEF constitute expenses of the Organization within the meaning of Article 17, paragraph 2, of the United Nations Charter.
18.	It is true that this is an advisory opinion but we feel that the decision is an historical one and is also peculiarly significant. We solemnly appeal to all Members to accept the International Court's opinion and show their good faith by contributing their quota to these peace-keeping operations. If we fail to do this, the result may be to paralyse the United Nations in one of its most important functions, to stifle its growth and to retard the development of international law and order and stability in our strife-torn world.
19.	Independence has come to many countries in the past few years. This has been an important means of eliminating some of the tensions arising from foreign domination. Independence by itself, however, is not enough. The economic gap between developed countries and developing countries is great and seems to be widening.
20.	As one of the purposes of this Organization is to achieve International co-operation in solving International problems of economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, it is necessary for greater efforts to be exerted in this decade of development. There is a passionate desire among people in the developing countries for a better life. If they are not to be disappointed in their hopes, long-term planning and greater assistance will be needed to develop dynamic economies.
21.	Through the promotion and expansion of various means of co-operation for general development, international tensions will also be reduced. The developed countries have the opportunity now to use more imagination and to put forth maximum efforts in this particular field of economic assistance, the surface of which is just being scratched. In doing so, they should consider the virtues and advantages of using multilateral means.
22.	We read a great deal in the newspapers these days about the success of the European Common Market and, of course, we can rejoice to knew that six nations have found a means of increasing their prosperity by exchanging rivalry for co-operation. It must not be overlooked, however, that a strictly limited prosperity may hi the end create more problems than it solves. The world has reached a stage at which we can no longer risk the continuance of a situation in which the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. Prosperity must be indivisible. The work cannot survive if it is to lie part palace, part slum. I commend this consideration to all those who may take part in Common Market negotiations in the future.
23.	Great scientific achievements have been made in space and in peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We are pleased to note that some advance has been made among the big Powers for co-operation in space. We can only hope that this co-operation can be extended to the communication satellite and to other fields so that economic growth in developing countries can be accelerated and turned into self-sustaining growth.
24.	My Government registers its special congratulations and appreciation to the United Nations committees on decolonization, South West Africa and the Portuguese Territories for their excellent work.
25.	The resolution adopted at the sixteenth session of the General Assembly regarding the Constitution of 1961 of Southern Rhodesia [1174 (XVI)] provides an accurate indication of how the majority of the people of the world and the peoples of that country feel about a government which the indigenous population bad no part in creating. The African population does not have adequate representation in that government. The Federation was instituted without seeking the views of the majority.
26.	The decision was made as if these people did not exist. Governments should tie instituted with the consent of the governed and this is the philosophy to which the United Nations Itself subscribes. The Africans have therefore properly rejected the new Constitution of Southern Rhodesia. At the Foreign Ministers’ meeting of the Conference of African and Malagasy States in Lagos in June 1962, we authorized our representatives here to see that a resolution on this matter was presented,
27.	My Government feels certain that, with the attitude and past performance of the United Kingdom on the whole matter of decolonization and Independence, that Government will respect the decision of the General Assembly,
28.	Because the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples has observed that South Africa has some expansionist and imperialistic designs on the territories of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, this General Assembly should declare that these territories are not open to unscrupulous seizure.
29.	The General Assembly has in the past approved a number of resolutions in respect of the colonial territories under Portuguese rule, but they have all been flouted. The empty pride, stubbornness and obstinacy of the Portuguese Government have been exhibited for all the world to see. The Special Committee on Territories under Portuguese Administration has recommended that the Government of Portugal should grant independence to its territories [A/ 5160 and Corr.1, paras. 442-443],
30.	The Committee has also reported that there are reasons to believe that NATO arms have been used to fight the Africans. I referred to this in the course of the general debate last year [1017th meeting, para. 48] and recommended an arms embargo. If NATO is pledged to save lives, it should not seek to save the lives of Europeans and destroy the lives of Africans.
31.	What the report reveals is not different from what the African States have been saying nor is it different from the account of those few We stern representatives who have been permitted to enter the territories. This so-called historic mission to spread civilization has been unmasked and is now found to be one of the greatest perpetrators of falsehood and deception the world has ever seen. The African States are being constantly condemned and castigated in the Portuguese Press. But we are not the enemy of Portugal. The real enemy of Portugal is Portugal itself.
32.	My Government will support the report of the Special Committee and will join in any reasonable action designed to persuade and coerce Portugal to see the error of its ways and to conform to the principles of the Charter. I desire to emphasize, however, that continued defiance of United Nations decisions is not compatible with membership in the United Nations.
33.	In the report of the United Nations Special Committee on South West Africa, it is the view of the Committee that the United Nations should take over South West Africa and prepare it for independence (A/5212, paras. 79-82). Here are Africans practically separated from the world and deprived of freedom and human rights. This can become a very serious threat to peace and security.
34.	My Government and that of Ethiopia have brought a contentious proceeding in the International Court of Justice on this matter and hearings will start on the preliminary objections to jurisdiction in the next few days. However, any action taken by this Assembly which will relieve the unhappy situation in South West Africa will be supported by the Liberian delegation,
35.	The story of South Africa itself is one of extreme sadness. Perhaps we should pity those people in their incredible actions. But the continued defiance of the resolutions of the United Nations, the pursuit of the iniquitous policy of apartheid and the enactment of more stringent laws which deny the Africans all fundamental rights require some attention and action by the United Nations. Drastic diseases require drastic remedies and my delegation will support firm action to stop this senseless drift.
36.	One can understand the reluctance of the non- African communities of Central and Southern Africa to give up the special privileges which they now enjoy. One cannot understand their failure to realize that, in their own interest, this reluctance must be overcome. Have they read nothing of recent history? Can they not realize that of the long succession of colonialist wars fought since 1945, not one has ended with a victory for the moribund colonial cause? Six and a half years of struggle in Algeria have just ended with the now familiar denouement — the triumph of nationalism. Those non-Africans who still dream of clinging to power in Africa can hope for no more success than was achieved in Algeria. All they can hope to do is to prolong a battle which they are bound to lose and which will grow more and more bitter, more and more futile, as the months and years are allowed to pass and the last opportunities for conciliation are frittered away. We must pray that the leaders responsible for this vain effort to keep the book of history open forever at page 1962 will be blessed with a change of heart and a clearing of vision before it is too late.
37.	My Government received an appeal from the Acting Secretary-General requesting its continued assistance in the efforts of the United Nations for peace in the Republic of the Congo. The Secretary-General noted that since independence in I960 the stability and territorial integrity of the country had not been established, that the continued defiance of the province of Katanga and the support which it has been able to receive from various outside sources makes it difficult for the Central Government to overcome its problems and perform its responsibilities. It is this state of affairs which makes necessary the continued financial expenditures of the United Nations in the amount of about $10 million per month and the posting of about 15,000 troops.
38.	For any hope of peace and prosperity, for stability in the territory, for peace in Africa and the world, the Congo crisis must be brought to an end and the territory should be united. The Government of Liberia, which has a contingent of troops in the Congo, believes that one of the most significant developments since the Congo crisis is the Acting Secretary-General's recent proposal for ending the secession of Katanga. My delegation will give its full support to the Secretary-General's proposal and hopes that the Congolese people will give these proposals a fair trial as an important beginning in bringing to an end the crisis which has plagued that young country in the past two years; for it is the Congolese people themselves who alone must resolve this tragic problem.
39.	Concomitant with the rapid decolonization process has been an increase in the membership of the Organization, with States from Africa and Asia making up almost fifty per cent. This has imposed on the African- Asian States the important responsibility of exercising their influence with even greater care and responsibility and we are fully cognizant of this. But there are important organs from which African-Asian States are excluded under agreements made before the increase in membership. Either the membership of these organs has to be increased or we will strive to use our votes to ensure adequate representation on each of them,
40.	There have been some recent outbursts by some States when certain decisions went against them and these States have also made attacks against the motives of the majority. It is true that some of the States which felt themselves entrenched may be worried that there are large numbers of States which are thinking differently and they have been obviously stung by some adverse votes. They have therefore attacked the United Nations and sent up trial balloons about change in the voting system in the United Nations Assembly. My Government considers this another direct attack on one of the fundamental principles on which this Organization was founded — the sovereign equality of all Members — and it will oppose any such change, just as we oppose the proposed change regarding the administrative machinery of the Secretariat.
41.	So far as I am aware, no one has yet been able to devise any new form of voting procedure that would, on the face of it, be just as equitable and likely to appeal to a majority of the Members of this Assembly. What is to be the new criterion? The geographical area of each State? There are many States which are largely desert. The population of each State? That would put all power in the hands of a very small group of nations. The wealth of each State? That would be going back to the nineteenth century with a vengeance. No, this is a case where the lack of any workable alternative compels us, in my view, to let well enough alone or, in the words of the poet: "To keep a hold of nurse For fear of finding something worse."
42.	Some States seem to arrogate to themselves the determination that views not in accord with their own on some problems are wrong, and thereby insidiously imply that States which vote contrary to their point of view are acting unreasonably. We reject this view. I do not believe that I can emphasize too strongly that the price for compromise on the system of one vote for each country in the General Assembly is too high and may bring about a sacrifice that could adversely affect the Organization.
43.	Another result of the increased membership has been the length of the recent Assembly sessions, Both the 1960 and 1961 Assemblies have had resumed sessions extending into the following year. This is an expensive proposition both in terms of finances and personnel, especially for the smaller countries and the United Nations itself. The President of the General Assembly at its sixteenth session, Mr. Mongi Slim, has offered a number of suggestions concerning changes in the procedures of the General Assembly [A/5123] in the hope that these changes might produce efficiency and speed in the discharge of the Assembly's functions. As far as can be seen, the number of items on the agenda will not diminish. Indeed, the evidence points to the conclusion that they will increase each year. Mr. Slim must therefore be congratulated for his constructive initiative in advancing these suggestions.
44.	However, in order that these and any additional proposals may serve to achieve the objectives envisaged by Mr. Slim and be approved by Member States of the United Nations, my delegation is prepared to co-sponsor a draft resolution by which this Assembly shall create an ad hoc committee with terms of reference which will enable the committee to make recommendations regarding the implementation of the proposals.
45.	Finally, we stand on the threshold of an era in world affairs where with new vision and greater imagination we can make the United Nations one of the world's great forces for peace, and usher in a long period of greater development and victory over the scourges of poverty, ignorance and disease; but a lack of vision and imagination may well cause us all to perish. It is my earnest hope that, in spite of the complexity of the problems, our deliberations at this session will bring about some solutions, lessen the tensions and start us on the road to assuring international peace and security.
