Mr. President, may I first of all congratulate you on your election to the high position of President of the seventeenth session of the General Assembly.
2.	The delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic would like to put forward today the Mongolian Government's point of view on some of the most important problems of present-day international life.
3.	Never in the past has the question of peace and war assumed such overwhelming importance as at the present time. The spectacular progress made in science and technology has led not only to great achievements which serve the cause of the welfare of mankind, but also to the invention of those terrible means of mass destruction, nuclear and thermonuclear weapons. That is the reason why the peoples must strive still more earnestly to preserve and strengthen peace and security by every possible means and to banish bloody wars, above all thermonuclear holocausts, from the life of mankind. The United Nations, which has proclaimed its aim and purpose to be the maintenance of international peace and security and the saving of succeeding generations from the scourge of war, must not only appreciate the full gravity of these problems, but also take effective measures to bring about their successful solution. The peoples of the world have the right to expect that at this session the burning questions of the day will be energetically discussed and that constructive decisions will be taken concerning them.
4.	In this dynamic age of ours, in which different social systems and different social and political outlooks exist in the world, the only reasonable way in which nations can live together is by peaceful coexistence and the settlement of disputes between States by peaceful means, through negotiation.
5.	The States Members of the United Nations have taken a solemn pledge to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours. This provision of the United Nations Charter enshrines the principle of the peaceful coexistence of all States, regardless of differences in their political, social, and economic systems. This principle of international relations is not contrived, but is dictated by life itself as an indispensable element in the development of human society.
6.	This principle lies at the basis of Mongolian foreign policy, which has its roots in the very essence of our popular-democratic structure and in the sincere efforts of the Mongolian people to preserve and strengthen the general peace and security of nations.
7.	Unfortunately, not all countries as yet adhere to this principle in their foreign policy. The monopolistic circles of certain Western countries are sometimes highly displeased when a nation chooses for itself a social system which is not to their taste.
8.	While inciting war hysteria against heroic Cuba, the government officials of the United States of America are making no secret of the fact that one of the reasons for their aggressive actions is Cuba's socialist system.
9.	At the same time, in order to "justify" their aggression against Cuba, they are trying to convince public opinion that Cuba is carrying on subversive activities against the United States and other neighbouring countries, and is preparing aggressive action against them. Thus, Mr. Stevenson asserted from this rostrum that Cuba is threatening the United States and its neighbours of the Western Hemisphere [1125th meeting]. Is there anyone who can believe such an assertion? It would never enter the mind of any person of common sense that little Cuba could menace one of the greatest and mightiest capitalist Powers of the world — the United States of America.
10.	Have Cuban warplanes and warships bombed and shelled peaceful American towns? Have the Cuban authorities assembled and organized hired gunmen for attacks on the United States? No! On the contrary, however, the Republic of Cuba has more than once been the victim of all these types of aggression on the part of the United States of America.
11.	The war hysteria against revolutionary Cuba that is now gathering strength in the United States and the outrageous demands made by certain reckless elements for direct military intervention against Cuba are fraught with the gravest dangers to the cause of peace.
12.	The United Nations must recognize, at this perilous moment, its high responsibility for the maintenance of the peace and security of nations and its obligation to take decisive steps to stop United States aggression against the Republic of Cuba, a Member of the United Nations.
13.	The present generation, which has experienced the horrors of two world wars, longs for peace and tranquillity, and emphatically demands the taking of effective steps to remove the threat of a new destructive war.
14.	In the eyes of the nations of the world, the surest and most thorough means of achieving this aim is general and complete disarmament under effective international control.
15.	The programme for general and complete disarmament put forward by the Head of the Soviet Government, Mr. Nikita Sergeevich Khrushchev, at the fifteenth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations [869th meeting] is today of even greater significance for the preservation of peace. Today, the idea of general and complete disarmament has won the hearts and minds of millions of people all over the globe.
16.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic has carefully followed the progress of the discussions of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, which have, unfortunately, so far failed to produce any concrete results. I will not at this point go into detail concerning all the reasons for the fruitlessness of the Eighteen-Nation Committee's work — we shall have a chance to do that in the course of the detailed and comprehensive consideration of the problems of disarmament later on — but I would like to say, in the plainest possible way, that the main reason is that certain Western Powers do not really want to reach agreement on disarmament.
17.	Now, more than ever, some way must be found for removing without further delay the danger and the possibility of nuclear attack by one State on another,
18.	It is for this very reason that our Government fully supports the Soviet proposals, which indicate the real way to achieve this aim: by beginning the process of disarmament with the destruction of the means of delivering nuclear weapons and the simultaneous elimination of all military bases on alien territories. Unfortunately, however, these realistic proposals have not met with a suitable response from the Western Powers, and above all from the United States of America,
19.	These Powers, as the course of the discussions of the Eighteen-Nation Committee has shown, are striving, not for the quickest possible agreement on disarmament under strict international control, but for the establishment of armaments control without the removal of their military bases and troops from the territory of other countries in order thus to obtain definite military advantages to the detriment of the security of peace-loving countries.
20.	As everyone knows, the Soviet Union, motivated by the desire to reach agreement as rapidly as possible, has more than once made additions and amendments to its draft Treaty on General and Complete Disarmament in order to take account of the attitude of the Western Powers. Very recently, the Soviet Government went still further to meet the wishes of the Western Powers by agreeing to make an exception — in the destruction during the first stage of disarmament of the means of .delivering nuclear weapons — for an agreed and strictly limited quantity of certain types or rockets possessed only by the Soviet Union and the United States.
21.	We venture to hope that the Western Powers will give this proposal the attention it deserves and will make some concessions in order to make it easier to reach agreement on disarmament.
22.	A successful solution of the question of prohibiting nuclear weapons tests would mark and important step along the road to general and complete disarmament. This problem, a solution to which is long overdue, is of vital importance to the whole of mankind.
23.	The socialist countries have done all they can to bring about the early and final suspension of nuclear weapons tests. It is with satisfaction that we acknowledge also the tireless efforts of the neutralist States in this direction. In our opinion, the Joint Memorandum submitted by the eight neutralist States in the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament with regard to the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests has also played a definitely constructive role. So far, the United States and the United Kingdom have always given an unsympathetic reception to all proposals for the cessation of nuclear weapons tests put forward by the Soviet Union or the neutralist countries, and because of the obstructionist policies of the Western powers this problem has not yet been solved.
24.	To judge from the statement made by Mr. Stevenson at the present session on the question of the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests, the United States Government may be ready to come part of the way towards meeting the proposals of the neutralist countries and other realistic suggestions in this field. We hope that these intentions will not be limited to a mere statement but will be backed up by practical action.
25.	Taking into account the views of the Western Powers, the Soviet Union just recently proposed the signing of an agreement to ban nuclear tests in the atmosphere, under water and in outer space, and the inclusion in such agreement of an undertaking by the signatories to continue talks on the discontinuance of underground tests. This proposal would form an excellent basis — if the Western Powers really wanted it — for the rapid and successful settlement of this burning question.
26.	Our delegation proposes that the General Assembly of the United Nations should adopt a resolution calling on the nuclear Powers to put forward their greatest efforts to reach agreement as quickly as possible, on this basis, for banning for ever all types of thermo-nuclear weapons tests, so that 1963 may become the year of the complete and unconditional prohibition of the testing of weapons of mass destruction.
27.	We consider that the General Assembly of the United Nations should also adopt a resolution condemning propaganda for a preventive nuclear war and imposing on the nuclear Powers the obligation never to be the first to use nuclear weapons in any war.
28.	The adoption of such a resolution is extremely important and apt at the present moment when, in the NATO countries, against the background of the ever-increasing tempo of the nuclear arms race, unbridled propaganda for a preventive war is being carried on, and aggressive voices are calling for the NATO Powers to be the first to launch a nuclear attack. Our sacred duty is to condemn unequivocally this inhuman propaganda and curb the thermo-nuclear warmongers.
29.	While fully recognizing the importance of eliminating the military apparatus of States in order to ensure the security of nations, our delegation would like to emphasize the enormous significance of the economic aspect of disarmament.
30.	The realization of general and complete disarmament would be of the greatest benefit to the whole of mankind. It would not only save our planet from the threat of a thermo-nuclear catastrophe but would also immeasurably improve the economic situation and level of living of the peoples of all countries without exception. There is no need to lay particular stress on the great advantages which developing countries would derive from the release of vast material and financial resources as a result of disarmament.
31.	The Mongolian people have already learned what great benefits flow from the conversion of material resources and manpower from military purposes to peaceful construction.
32.	As a result of the formation of the world socialist system after the Second World War and the victory of the great Chinese people in 1949, favourable conditions were created for the peaceful building of socialism in our country. The Mongolian People’s Republic, being surrounded by fraternal countries, had the opportunity of sharply reducing the size of its armed forces. Whereas in the 1940's military expenditure represented almost half of the national budget, it now accounts for only 2.9 per cent. The great material and financial resources released in this way became an important factor in the accelerated advance of the country's economy and culture.
33.	In 1961, by comparison with 1947, total capital investment in the national economy had increased 11.6 times, this including an increase of twenty-two times in capital investment in industry and of more than 100 times in agriculture. Over the same period, capital investment for the development of national health services and culture increased fourfold. As a result of all this, new branches of industry — fuel and power, mining, wood-working, construction and so forth — have been set up in our country in recent years. In addition, a complete innovation has been introduced in agriculture in the form of mechanized farming.
34.	The Mongolian People's Republic, which in the past was one of the most backward feudal and colonial countries in the world, has today become an agrarian- industrial country with a flourishing and diversified economy and culture.
35.	I have put forward here the specific example of but one small country. Think, then, what great benefit the peoples of all countries would receive, and first and foremost those of the young developing States, if the disarmament plan became a reality. It has been estimated that at the present time the military expenditure of all countries is at least five times greater than the total capital investment of the under-developed areas.
36.	Our delegation hopes in this connexion that the "Economic Programme for disarmament" [A/5233] proposed by the Soviet Union will be discussed in a thoroughgoing manner at this session and that the General Assembly will adopt the Declaration concerning the conversion to peaceful needs of the resources released by disarmament [Ibid.].
37.	The complete and final liquidation of the outdated colonial system is also one of the important and urgent tasks facing the United Nations. The shameful colonial system of imperialism is disintegrating under the pressure of the national liberation movements.
38.	Progressive forces throughout the world regard the peoples' national liberation movements as the most important revolutionary event of the second half of our century.
39.	The Mongolian people, which themselves experienced in the past the horrors of alien enslavement, have great sympathy for the struggle of the peoples for national independence, and they hail each new victory in this battle as their own. They welcome with all their heart the historic victory of the heroic Algerian people, the formation of a peace-loving and neutral Laos, the attainment of independence by the peoples of Rwanda, Burundi, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago, and the settlement of the question of West Irian by peaceful means.
40.	Allow me to offer hearty congratulations to our colleagues, the representatives of Rwanda, Burundi, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago, the young independent States which have joined the family of the United Nations, and to wish the peoples of these countries great success in further strengthening their political independence and in rehabilitating and developing the economy and culture of their countries.
41.	The imperialist Powers are trying in every way to preserve their colonial domination and impose new forms of colonialism on peoples who are attaining freedom. The colonial Powers are disregarding the clear demands of the General Assembly's Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)], Despite the aspirations of the oppressed peoples, the colonizers are still keeping many of the countries of Asia, Africa and Oceania in colonial bondage. Thus, for example, in Africa alone more than 36 million people are still languishing under the colonial yoke.
42.	The imperialist Powers are trying to replace or supplement, wherever possible, the old classic colonialism with new and subtler forms of domination. Neocolonialism manifests itself in the most diverse forms, ranging from such a very obvious method for the subjection of weak countries as luring them into bilateral and multilateral military alliances and the establishment of military bases on their territory, to the granting of so-called "aid" tied to political and other conditions.
43.	The question of the complete liquidation of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations will brook no further delay. Colonialism is not only a shameful form of oppression and exploitation of the peoples of the colonies which retards their development in all respects, but it also represents a threat to general peace and security. As yet not completely defeated, it continues its evil deeds. Blood is being shed by the peoples of Angola, so-called Portuguese Guinea, Oman and other countries. The cruel repression wreaked by the colonizers is rampant in Mozambique, Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Southwest Africa and other colonies.
44.	The Western Powers continue their crude interference in the internal affairs of the Republic of the Congo in order to protect the mercenary interests of their monopolies, which are making fabulous profits from the exploitation of the Congo's natural resources. The United Nations should not overlook such facts. It has the duty to take effective measures against those colonial Powers which fail to comply with the United Nations Declaration on the liquidation of colonialism and do not heed the legitimate demands of the peoples of colonial and dependent countries.
45.	Our delegation considers it important for the present session to take a decision on accelerating the complete liquidation of colonialism and to fix definite and very early dates for the granting of independence to those countries which are still under the colonial yoke.
46.	The question of restoring the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations is one of the important problems of contemporary international life. The absence of legitimate representatives of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations not only contradicts the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations Charter but also does serious harm to its effective functioning. It is indisputable that only one China exists — the People's Republic of China — and that the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legitimate representative of the great Chinese people. There can likewise be no doubt that there is not one important international problem which can be solved without the participation of the People's Republic of China the weight and authority of which is recognized by the overwhelming majority of States. We all know that the Government of the People's Republic of China was one of the sponsors of the well-known five principles of peaceful coexistence among States. It was the first to come out in favour of creating a peace zone free from atomic weapons in the Far East and the Pacific basin, and of concluding a nonaggression pact between all countries of Asia and the Pacific littoral.
47.	Our delegation considers that the question of restoring the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China should be discussed with a full awareness of its significance for the prestige and normal functioning of the United Nations and for the cause of peace and international co-operation.
48.	There can be only one solution, and that is to expel from all organs of the United Nations the Chiang Kai-Shek clique, which represents no one, and restore the Chinese People's Republic to its rightful place.
49.	It is high time also that the question of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea were solved. The presence of foreign troops in South Korea and the transformation of the country into a United States military base are aggravating tension in the Far East and constitute the main obstacle to a peaceful settlement of the Korean question. In particular, the occupation of South Korea by foreign forces prevents the Korean people from reunifying their country peacefully and democratically.
50.	The delegation of the Mongolian People's Republic, you will remember, submitted at the last session of the General Assembly a draft resolution inviting all States with forces in South Korea to withdraw them without delay from Korean territory.
51.	If the United Nations could bring about a satisfactory solution of the question of withdrawing foreign forces from South Korea, it would greatly assist the Korean people in settling their internal affairs and would make a significant contribution to the noble cause of strengthening peace not only in the Far East but throughout the world.
52.	It is seven years since the Geneva agreement on an armistice in Indochina was signed, but the United States of America, having refused to withdraw its forces from South Viet-Nam, has converted that country into a military base of its own. This has created a source of tension in South Viet-Nam which is a menace to the peace and security of the peoples of South-East Asia and the entire world. It is imperative to put an end to this abnormal situation at once. The United States Government must immediately withdraw its forces from South Viet-Nam, desist from interference in the internal affairs of the Viet-Namese people and adhere strictly to the principles of the Geneva agreement.
53.	We have been informed that the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam has addressed a note [19 September 1962] to the President of the seventeenth session of the General Assembly drawing the attention of Members of the United Nations to the highly dangerous situation which now exists in South Viet-Nam.
54.	Our delegation calls upon the General Assembly to bring the weight of its great authority to bear and to condemn the aggressive actions of the United States and demand the withdrawal of its forces from South Viet-Nam.
55.	There are also a number of other unresolved international problems which are a serious threat to peace and general security.
56.	The most acute of all these problems continues to be the conclusion of a German peace treaty and the solution of the West Berlin problem on that basis.
57.	Any solution of the German problem including the question of West Berlin must take into account the actual situation in Germany since the Second World War, and the existence of two German states, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany.
58.	Events in the Federal Republic of Germany are a source of legitimate concern to all peoples, and particularly those who have experienced more that once all the horrors of the bloody wars unleashed by German imperialism.
59.	The revenge-seeking militaristic elements in West Germany, having restored their military potential with the direct support of the Western Powers, and especially the United States monopolists, have begun openly to demand "equality of armament" and the rapid equipping of the "Bundeswehr" with nuclear missiles, and are making territorial claims.
60. Furthermore, the authorities In the Federal Republic of Germany, In collaboration with the United Kingdom, United States and French occupying Powers, are systematically using West Berlin, which has in effect been turned into a NATO military base, for the purpose of carrying out against the German Democratic Republic provocative acts which are fraught with great danger because they are apt to start another world conflagration.
61.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic calls upon the States concerned to sign as soon as possible a peace treaty with the two German States actually existing on the territory of Germany and to settle, on that basis, the problem of making West Berlin a demilitarized free city with a special international status.
62.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic believes that in order to strengthen world peace, prompt and effective action must also be taken on such important problems as the conclusion of a non-aggression pact between the NATO and Warsaw Treaty countries, a ban on the further dissemination of nuclear weapons and the creation of atom-free zones in various parts of the world.
63.	The Mongolian People's Republic as an Asian country warmly supports the proposal to create a peace zone free from atomic weapons in the Far East and the Pacific basin.
64.	The implementation of this proposal is particularly urgent in view of the seriousness of the situation which has arisen in some areas of the Far East, especially Japan. The construction of United States military bases in Japan, the feverish restoration of Japan's war potential and the equipping of the country with nuclear missiles can only cause concern to the peace-loving peoples of Asia and the entire world.
65.	The lessons of the recent past are still fresh in the minds of the peoples, and unless decisive action is taken in time to stop this dangerous course of events, the world may be subjected to the catastrophe of another war.
66.	The Government of the Mongolian, People’s Republic is in favour of the expansion of economic co-operation and the development of fair and mutually beneficial trade between all countries of the world without discrimination,
67.	Our delegation, realizing the Importance of normalizing and extensively developing world trade on the basis of equality and mutual advantage, supports the proposal by the Soviet delegation for holding an International conference on trade problems (A/5219).
68.	The interests of the peoples of the world demand that all States Members of the United Nations should join in a full discussion of the question of setting up an international trade organization covering all countries and areas of the world.
69.	The establishment of such an organization would greatly facilitate international economic co-operation and fair, mutually beneficial trade,
70.	The present session of the General Assembly of the United Nations will make a big contribution to strengthening international economic co-operation if it takes specific decisions to promote the broad development of world trade in conformity with the real interests of nations.
71.	Those who have spoken before me have stressed the need for further strengthening of the United Nations in order to make its work more fruitful and effective. The United Nations should be the centre for concerted action by all States without exception. Our delegation consequently considers that the proposals for appropriate changes in the structure of the United Nations, especially as regards equal representation of all three main groups of States in the leading organs of the United Nations, are in complete accord with these requirements.
72.	in conclusion I would like to give an assurance that the Government of the Mongolian People's Republic will do everything in its power to co-operate with all peace-loving States in preserving and strengthening world peace and the security of nations in the spirit of the lofty aims and humane principles of the United Nations.
