Mr. President, joining the speakers who preceded me, I want to take this occasion to express to you the warmest congratulations of the Turkish delegation on your election as President of the General Assembly. I am sure your distinguished career, your valuable efforts in the service of the United Nations ideals, and your vast experience in the work of our Organization are the best guarantees for the successful conduct and conclusion of our deliberations during this session, I also consider your election to this high office a tribute to your great country, which has a brilliant record in its devotion to the principles of the United Nations.
61.	I should like also to pay tribute to your predecessor, the retiring President, Mr. Mongi Slim, whose valuable services for the furtherance of international co-operation and understanding have done honour to him and to his country,
62.	It is a cause of extreme satisfaction for my delegation to present our heart-felt congratulation to U Thant, on the most successful fulfilment of the important duties entrusted to him as Acting Secretary-General of our Organization, His brilliant accomplishments In the service of the United Nations confirm the wisdom which was shown by the members of this Organization In selecting him unanimously.
63.	During the last years we have been gratified at every opening session of the General Assembly in greeting and welcoming among us an ever-increasing number of new Members who have won their independence, As one of the participants of the Conference of San Francisco, seventeen years ago, I wish to say in all sincerity how happy I feel to see that our Organization has now achieved an almost universal character. Surely, our deliberations are enriched by the views of so many new countries and thus endowed with a wider perspective. It Is with these feelings that I welcome from this rostrum, on behalf of the Turkish people and the Turkish Government, the Kingdom of Burundi, the Republic of Rwanda, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago which have been admitted into the membership of the United Nations, I should like also to express my warmest greetings to the representatives of the new Member countries.
64.	I am sure, we shall soon have the great pleasure of welcoming the Republic of Algeria as well. We are extremely happy to see that the tragic events, the bloodshed and the ensuing human suffering which prevailed in Algeria over long years have come to an end by a settlement which not only does justice to the legitimate aspirations and fundamental rights of the valiant people of Algeria, but is also in conformity with the liberal traditions of France, of which this great country has given so many examples in its glorious history. I should like to pay tribute to the French and Algerian leaders who, by their statesmanship and wisdom, have brought about this happy solution. In this connexion, I should like to specially mention the prominent efforts of the Head of the State of France, General de Gaulle, which were decisive in the achievement of this solution.
65.	The developments which have taken place in my country since the Reform Movement of 27 May 1960, with the aim of furthering the cause of democracy with all the safeguards and institutions in the most advanced form, are fresh in our memories. A year ago at the 1021st meeting, my predecessor, Mr. Selim Sarper, said from this rostrum that a new constitution, with all necessary guarantees for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, had been adopted through a referendum on 9 July 1961, and that an electoral campaign was in progress in Turkey among four leading political parties. I have the great pleasure to state now that, following the general elections which were held on 15 October 1961, the freely elected representatives of the people have again assumed full responsibility in the conduct of the country's affairs. At the present time, Turkey has established a coalition government, a freely elected National Assembly, a Senate, a Constitutional Supreme Court, and all the appropriate institutions which have been deemed necessary to protect, under full guarantees, the fundamental rights of our citizens.
66.	It is often argued that those who carry out revolutionary movements do not voluntarily relinquish power to governments freely elected by the people. The Turkish movement, from its very first day, declared unequivocally that its principal aim was to restore the democratic institutions, with full safeguards, and to hand the power to a government which would be freely elected by the Turkish nation. Therefore, if there is any truth in this argument, Turkey has certainly been an exception to it,
67.	The Turkish nation and the Turkish Government are at the present time engaged in serious efforts to achieve speedy economic and social development. As is known, our first five-year plan is about to be submitted to the Turkish Parliament; under this plan the economic and social development of our country will be co-ordinated through the most rational methods available today.
68.	The agenda of the present session of the General Assembly contains a vast number of questions which await our arduous efforts to find satisfactory solutions. None of these problems is more essential to the preservation of world peace and more vital to the destiny of mankind than the question of disarmament. Last year, the Turkish delegation, together with other delegations, welcomed the agreement between the Governments of the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the basic principles which would serve as guidelines in disarmament negotiations. At the same time, the agreement achieved during the sixteenth session of the General Assembly [resolution 1722 (XVI)] for the establishment of a new and enlarged negotiating body, comprising eighteen Member nations, had given fresh hopes that substantial progress would be achieved towards the aim of general and complete disarmament under effective international controls. These agreements, it was hoped, could open the way for a disarmament programme which would ensure not only a complete and general disarmament to be implemented by stages, in agreed sequences and under effective control, but also the establishment of reliable procedures and arrangements for the maintenance of peace and security in conformity with the principles of the United Nations Charter. But the negotiations which started in Geneva on 14 March 1962 in the Disarmament Committee have unfortunately not lived up to our expectations, and the net result of these discussions has not given us concrete proof of real progress in this vital and urgent issue. In spite of the genuine efforts made within the Committee, the question of effective control, the hard core of the problem, has continued to be the main stumbling block in the way of progress.
69.	It is our deep-rooted conviction that s successful solution of the vital issue of disarmament can and must be found through fostering an atmosphere of mutual confidence and through the sincere efforts of all concerned, directed to the task of earnestly seeking a mutually acceptable solution and refraining from the use, as a means of propaganda, of this question on which may depend the destiny of all humanity.
70.	As a nation devoted to peace and progress, the Turkish people are aware of the advantages which would accrue from general disarmament. Certainly, disarmament in confidence and security would allow us to concentrate all our resources, manpower and energy on the attainment of a higher level of economic and social well-being. At the same time, we are convinced that a general agreement on disarmament, containing provisions for both nuclear and conventional weapons, to be implemented under adequate controls, designed to confer no advantages on any side and to be accompanied by appropriate arrangements guaranteeing the security of all countries, large and small, will constitute the only real basis for that lasting universal peace which is our common aim.
71.	I should now like to say a few words on another important problem, closely connected with the subject of disarmament. The importance of the conclusion of a treaty to ban nuclear tests under a satisfactory system of verification, where needed, is equally of paramount importance. A year ago the arduous negotiations conducted in the tripartite Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapons Tests at Geneva had reached a stage which gave reasonable hope for the early conclusion of such a treaty. Unfortunately, our hopes were disappointed as a result of the unexpected resumption of nuclear tests. Thus, a rather long and promising period of serious negotiations, coupled with a voluntary three-year moratorium on test explosions, was brought to an end, and the world is now witnessing with anxiety a general resumption of nuclear tests.
72.	My delegation cannot but express its regret that extremely reasonable proposals on the banning of nuclear tests, which contain genuine concessions and which were made in Geneva a short time ago in a spirit of compromise have not yet been accepted. Having heard the very clear statement of Lord Home at the last meeting on the standing proposals for a test ban, I would add that any further delay in reaching agreement on this important question would be all the more regrettable.
73.	The Turkish Government believes that for the continued well-being of humanity and for the preservation of the health of present and future generations it is imperative to conclude an international treaty banning nuclear tests under a satisfactory system of verification.
74.	Before I conclude my remarks on the general question of disarmament, I should like to reiterate our belief that a piecemeal approach to the highly complex problem of disarmament cannot provide any realistic basis for a mutually acceptable solution. We are of the opinion, therefore, that proposals containing a partial approach may result only in distracting world opinion from the real issue facing humanity today: the problem of achieving a general, balanced and realistically phased arrangement on disarmament under appropriate guarantees. In our view, provisions on the prohibition of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons must form part of such a general agreement, which should also include stipulations concerning the manufacture and stockpiling of such weapons, as well as all conventional weapons, at the conclusion of a realistic international agreement on disarmament.
75.	International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space has come to be an important subject which is receiving due attention from the General Assembly. I believe that all of us agree that outer space should be explored and used with the sole aim of serving mankind. The space age has opened new horizons to humanity. Therefore the United Nations efforts to establish guiding principles and rules for the exploration and use of outer space in the common interest of mankind should be encouraged and assisted by all means. Here I should like to join other speakers in paying a tribute to the scientists and astronauts of the United States and the Soviet Union for their spectacular achievements in the exploration of outer space.
76.	There is no doubt that, when future generations look back to the present era in the perspective of history, the movement for freedom, self-determination and independence will manifest itself as the most characteristic trend of our times. The Turkish people have given ample proof of their allegiance to these high ideals, both in their history and in their present stand. During the past years the General Assembly has wisely and in a constructive manner elucidated the guiding principles of this great movement of our time. The Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)], of which my delegation had the honour to be among the original sponsors, was adopted by the General Assembly at its fifteenth session by a near unanimity of votes. This Declaration reaffirms our faith in such fundamental principles as self-determination, freedom, independence and territorial integrity. These are lofty pinciples, which the Turkish people hold dear. Imbued with these sentiments, the Turkish delegation, as in the past, will not fail to make its constructive contribution to the safeguarding and realization of these principles. My country's attachment to the ideals of the United Nations and its unflagging efforts towards the ever-increasing success of our Organization are well known.
77.	The United Nations can succeed in its efforts if all the Member nations sincerely adhere to the Purposes and Principles of our Charter and make their contribution in accordance with these precepts. It is also of vital importance that the United Nations should have an independent executive who will carry out his mission strictly in accordance with the terms of the Charter and without any interference whatsoever. The views of the Turkish delegation regarding the preservation of the independence and integrity of the Secretariat were stated many times and are on the records. I will not, therefore, repeat them at length. I would like only to emphasize the utmost importance that my Government attaches to this matter.
78.	Speaking of adherence to the Purposes and Principles of the Charter, it should be borne in mind that unswerving respect by the Member nations for the rule of law is at the very basis of the United Nations concept. In fact, such high principles as respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law, for fundamental human rights and the independence, territorial integrity and the sovereign equality of all nations, are enshrined in our Charter.
79.	The Turkish Republic all along the path of its history has given numerous examples of its allegiance to these principles and to the rule of law among nations. During the drafting of the United Nations Charter in San Francisco and since the establishment of our Organization, the Turkish delegation submitted various proposals or supported those made by others with a view to furthering the rule of international law.
80.	As is well known, Turkey is also among the countries recognizing the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance with Article 36 of the Statute of the Court.
81.	With regard to the efforts deployed within the United Nations to ensure the progressive development of international law and its codification, I would like to mention, among other things, the valuable work already achieved by the preparation of a "Draft Declaration on Rights and Duties of States" [see resolution 375 (IV)]. My delegation is of the opinion that this draft constitutes another contribution in the efforts aimed at the ascendancy of the rule of law, which must prevail in the relations of all nations.
82.	It is with these thoughts and sentiments that my delegation intends to make its constructive contribution during the examination of the item called "Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations", in the appropriate committee.
83.	When the General Assembly met last year, the world was confronted with a serious deterioration in the political atmosphere. This political tension was mainly due to the Berlin question. In these opening days of the seventeenth session of the General Assembly the political horizon is unfortunately still darkened by the Berlin problem. The Turkish people nourish sincere feelings of friendship and understanding for the German people. They are distressed to see that the great German nation is still deprived of achieving its unity in conformity with the principles recognized by the United Nations Charter as inherent rights of all nations. The beginning of this year brought with it some rays of hope as to the possibility of achieving a negotiated settlement over Berlin which would protect the rights and the legitimate interests of all the parties concerned. In spite of the darkened horizon, we would like to express our most sincere wish that a negotiated settlement will be finally found serving the cause of peace, In this connexion, I believe it will be well to point out that the decision taken at the Conference of Heads of Government of the four great Powers at Geneva in 1955 acknowledged the fact that the settlement of the German question and the unification of Germany through free elections would be in conformity with the national interest of the German people and in the interest of the security of Europe.
84.	Among the items to be discussed in the First Committee is the question of Korea, which has been on the agenda of the General Assembly for years. We have constantly endorsed the objectives of the United Nations in Korea which aim at the establishment of a freely unified, independent and democratic Korea, in the full restoration of peace and security in the area. I wish to express the hope that the deliberations in the First Committee this year may bring about a better atmosphere towards the solution of this question.
85.	The Turkish delegation constantly supported the decisions of the United Nations taken with a view to re-establishing order and tranquillity in the Congo and preserving the territorial integrity of that country. We are happy to see that tragic incidents have come to an end in the Congo and that internal peace and order have been established. We do hope that the efforts deployed with the aim of preserving the territorial integrity of the Congo will prove successful in the near future, putting an end to all moves which endanger the unity of that country,
86.	My delegation would like to express its satisfaction and appreciation for the efforts of our Acting Secretary-General, U Thant, and it supports the measures taken by him in conformity with the decisions adopted by the competent organs of the United Nations on the Congo. Here I would like also to recall in tribute the relentless and courageous efforts of the late Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjold, who gave his life while trying to uphold successfully the Principles and Purposes of the Charter in the Congo.
87.	In addition to its efforts aimed at the settlement of a number of political questions, our Organization is also engaged in other activities which cannot be considered less important. In fact, one may say that the degree of success in these latter activities may pave the way to the solution of many important political problems. Indeed, the activities tending to create a community of nations economically balanced and socially stable, will be decisive in the establishment of a lasting peace in justice and well-being.
88.	There is no doubt that the question of engendering an accelerated economic advancement for less developed countries is among the most important problems confronting the world today. A world order in which nations can live in real peace and security can best be created by a community of nations which have successfully overcome poverty, disease and illiteracy. The existing striking disparity between the more advanced and the less-advanced areas in the world cannot be conducive to the harmonious international relations to which we all aspire. The distress which covers vast areas today can certainly be eliminated in this era of unparalleled technological advancement. Most of the less developed countries — which in this world Organization form the majority — suffer mostly from lack of capital, capital goods and technical knowledge, in their efforts for economic development.
89.	I would like to mention with gratification the fact that, besides numerous bilateral, regional or multilateral programmes designed to help promote the economic, cultural and technical advancement of the underdeveloped countries, efforts are also being made under the aegis of the United Nations to bring assistance to these countries to meet their most urgent requirements. I would like to mention especially in this respect the valuable services rendered by the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, the Special Fund, as well as the specialized agencies. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the International Monetary Fund have made outstanding contributions to this great cause.
90.	My delegation holds the view that in the future the United Nations will have an ever-increasing part to play in the great struggle for economic, social and cultural progress all over the world. It was with these thoughts that we welcomed the proposal made last year by President Kennedy, at the General Assembly [1013th meeting], for a programme of international economic co-operation, namely, the United Nations Development Decade.
91.	As will be remembered, this proposal was discussed in the Second Committee and later resolution 1710 (XVI) was adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 1961. In this resolution, which the Turkish delegation had the honour to co-sponsor, the General Assembly pointed to the aims embodied in the Charter of the United Nations for the promotion of social progress and the attainment of higher standards of living in larger freedom and through the use of international machinery. Again, in this resolution, it was rightly emphasized that: "the economic and social development of the economically less developed countries is not only of primary importance to those countries but is also basic to the attainment of international peace and security and to a faster and mutually beneficial increase in world prosperity". The guidelines and the procedure established by this resolution are of such a nature as to give additional impetus to international co-operation in the field of economic and social advancement among the developing and less developed countries. My delegation firmly believes that the United Nations will gain added prestige in the eyes of all the peoples of the world to the extent of its success in this vital field of international co-operation.
92.	At the beginning of my statement, I spoke of the resolute efforts of the Turkish nation and the Turkish Government for a speedy economic and social development. While trying to cope successfully with the problems arising from this vast scheme of development, the Turkish Government is at the same time making every effort to promote international co-operation in many fields, particularly in the field of education, by providing educational facilities, including scholarships, to the students from foreign countries. I take pleasure in stating that during the past year over one thousand students from the Middle Eastern countries, and many from other countries, were enrolled in Turkish colleges and universities. Although our higher educational institutions are finding it more and more difficult to accommodate all the Turkish students who apply for registration, the Turkish authorities are doing their best to meet the ever increasing demands for admittance from abroad. Among the scholarships offered by the Turkish Government to foreign students, many are reserved for students from African countries.
93.	Two goodwill missions from Turkey which recently visited several African States were received with utmost cordiality and hospitality. I would like to take this opportunity to express once again, from this rostrum, my Government's thanks and appreciation for the friendly welcome extended to the Turkish goodwill missions. As an outcome of these successful contacts, the Turkish authorities, on their part, are taking the necessary steps for establishing or strengthening bilateral friendly co-operation with these countries, especially in the field of education and cultural exchange. As an initial step, an increase in scholarships offered to students from the African continent is being envisaged.
94.	Speaking of international co-operation, I believe that the move of solidarity displayed almost spontaneously by the Member countries regarding measures to be explored for bringing help to the victims of the recent earthquake disaster in Iran is a most striking example of co-operation on humanitarian grounds under the aegis of the United Nations. I would like to express once more, from this rostrum, the deep sympathy of the Turkish people and the Turkish Government for the people of Iran in their tragic hour. Turkey immediately extended a helping hand to the Iranian people and hopes that the United Nations will take the most appropriate steps to heal the wounds caused by this tragedy.
95.	In concluding my statement, I wish to assure you that in the course of our deliberations my delegation will spare no efforts, in co-operation with other delegations, to support constructive proposals for the harmonious and positive solution of all matters which figure on our agenda. I also wish to reiterate the earnest hope of my Government and of the Turkish nation that this seventeenth session of the General Assembly may successfully conclude its work by furthering the cause of international co-operation and understanding, of peace and security. We have every confidence that, under your able guidance, the General Assembly will achieve substantial progress in the solution of important problems, and thus give to mankind a fresh hope in the pursuit of happiness and wellbeing in a better world.
