Mr. President, I should like, first, of all, to congratulate you on behalf of the Yugoslav delegation on your election to the high and responsible post of President of the seventeenth session of the General Assembly, which is faced with considerable and important tasks, to whose constructive and positive solution you can give a precious contribution owing to your long years of experience in the work of our Organization.
45.	In the period since the previous session, our Organization, and the world as a whole, have been confronted by many unsettled international problems. We can note, however, with great satisfaction, that encouraging, new, positive elements and solutions have appeared.
46.	In the period under review, the agreement on Algeria Was reached. After many years of, bitter struggle, the Algerian people have won their freedom and independence. It is with great pleasure that the peoples and the Government of Yugoslavia welcome free and independents Algeria and wish the Algerian people every success, along the path of their unhindered independent development.
47.	The peoples and the Government of Yugoslavia, dedicated to the policy of the peaceful settlement of disputes, have welcomed with, much gratification the agreement between the Governments of Indonesia and the Netherlands on West Irian, an agreement which provides for the unification of West Irian with Indonesia and which was endorsed by the General Assembly last, Friday (1127th meeting]. The Yugoslav Government which has, since the very outset, supported the legitimate rights of Indonesia, expresses its appreciation for the patient and constructive efforts of the parties concerned and stresses, with pleasure, the significant contributions made by the Secretary-General, U Thant, to the solution of this problem.
48.	The agreement on Laos opens up before the people of that country prospect of peace and stability.
49.	These agreements show that, provided there is goodwill on the part of the parties concerned, and that mutual interests are respected, the greatest international problems can be successfully settled. Accordingly, these agreements constitute a new and strong confirmation of both the right of every nation to be master of its own fate and of the policy of negotiation and peaceful settlement of international disputes.
50.	Among the positive tendencies, we should also mention the disarmament talks in Geneva, which have been taking place for the first time with active participation and constructive role of non-aligned countries.
51.	The exchange of letters between the President of the United States of America and the President of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, stating their readiness to establish international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space, as well as the unanimous recommendations of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee on scientific and technical co-operation in the use of outer space, open up the possibility of useful results in this new sphere of human endeavour. The United Nations should take measures to ensure that human advance into outer space should not become a new threat, but that it should contribute, on the contrary, to the wellbeing of mankind.
52.	A positive contribution to the establishment of international relations, on a basis of equality, and to the removal of the dangerous gap which divides the world into developed and underdeveloped regions was made by the Conference on, Problems of Economic Development, recently held in Cairo. The Cairo Declaration [A/5162] clearly states that the participating countries strive for co-operation among all countries, without discrimination, towards world economic progress. This bears out the fact that the developing countries wish to find solutions for the problems of their own development within the framework of the international economy. Therefore, one cannot deny that the efforts of the developing countries, as expressed in the Declaration, are in keeping with the United Nations Charter and that they offer a broad basis for the settlement of major economic problems.
53.	Great changes have occurred of late in the world within the framework and on the basis of which individual countries, and the world as a whole, are seeking new ways, new solutions, for many political, economic, social, internal and international problems. We are witnessing the historic: emancipation of many countries, thanks to which the membership of our Organization has increased to 108, and soon that number will be greater.
54.	 The Yugoslav delegation wishes to welcome the new Members of our Organization: Rwanda, Burundi, Jamaica, and the State of Trinidad and Tobago. We are confident that the increase in the number of independent countries will further diminish the spheres of conflict between the major power alignments and thereby encourage all tendencies towards the strengthening of peace and the promoting of peaceful co-operation among independent and equal peoples.
55.	An immense progress has been achieved in the development of science, technology and the means of economic development.
56.	Encouraged by such progress in the world, the overwhelming majority of mankind is becoming more and pore aware of the fact that war between nations is not only an, anachronism, but a crime against humanity. This awareness is becoming a tremendous moral force, capable of exerting a substantial influence on international relations.
57.	Relying on these facts, as well as on the will of their peoples, the Governments of an increasing number of countries resolutely reject the thesis of the inevitability of War as being pusillanimous, Offering no prospect, and contrary to the interests of world progress. They reaffirm their unshakable faith in the ability of the international community to organize its life without resorting to the use of force, which belongs to epochs long left behind by human history.
58.	All these positive tendencies and the results achieved confirm the fact that the policy of active and peaceful coexistence, which is so resolutely supported by the non-aligned countries, and which found such powerful expression at the Belgrade Conference last year, is making further progress and acquiring a place and role of growing importance in international relations. At the same time, the policy of coexistence carries into effect the spirit and the principles of the Charter, leading thereby to the strengthening of our organization and of its role in world affairs.
59.	However, the period under review was also burdened by many negative elements in international relations.
60.	The still unremoved consequences of the Second World War; the division of the world into blocs which are growing into ever stronger military, economic and political groupings and which, according to the logic and character of their mutual relations, inevitably give rise to periodic tensions in international relations, to the cold war, and are a constant danger of its turning into actual war; the persistence of colonial domination, along with the burdensome legacy of colonialism in newly liberated countries; the widening gap between advanced and developing countries; all these are also part of the present international situation.
61.	The World in which we live is characterized by the existence of different social systems. We, like many others, do not consider that these differences constitute an insurmountable obstacle to a lasting peace, provided tendencies of domination and interference in the internal development of other peoples and countries are excluded.
62.	Every nation should settle the problems of its, political and economic social systems in accordance with its own conditions, needs and possibilities. Moreover, any attempt to impose, by force and from without, this or that system on a people is a direct threat to peace.
63.	The Yugoslav Government has always abided by and carried out the principles of non-intervention and self-determination, and it is its firm desire that these principles should become guiding principles in the policies of all Governments, it is in this light that serious problems like that of Cuba and others can and should be settled. To fan the flames of this or other similar conflicts in a cold-war spirit only worsens the already-strained international situation and renders more difficult the attainment of peaceful solutions which are In the interests not only of the peoples of the countries concerned, but of the entire international community and the peace of the world.
64.	While the disarmament talks have led to some useful results, they have still marked no real progress. Tribute has been paid to the constructive proposals of non-aligned countries in the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, but rigid positions have been maintained and — a cause for particular concern — the armaments race not only continues, but is growing in intensity.
65.	Neither have the talks on Berlin entered a less disquieting phase, although they have been going on for months and although the remaining differences are not of such a nature as to constitute a genuine obstacle to an agreement. It is therefore even more urgent that we should resolutely request the continuation of the pursuit, on an appropriate level, of a solution which would take into account the existing realities in Germany, so that this dangerous hotbed in the centre of Europe may be removed as soon as possible and the problem of Berlin settled in accordance with the interests of the German people and of peace in Europe and the world.
66.	Colonialism, by putting up a desperate resistance at its remaining stronghold, not only seeks — vainly, of course — to check the irresistible course of history, but endangers peace in certain particularly sensitive areas. I have in mind, above all, the colonial war in Angola, the harsh colonial oppression in Mozambique, the. disquieting situation in Southern Rhodesia, the policy of apartheid in South Africa, In reaffirming the undeniable right of colonial peoples to freedom and in emphasizing that it is in the interests of peace in the world that these vestiges of the past be removed as soon as possible, we resolutely support the demand that Angola, Mozambique and ether dependent African territories acquire their independence Without delay. In this respect the United Nations should lend them even more determined support in accordance with the historic, anti-colonial Declaration adopted by, the General Assembly two years ago. At the same time, we must stress the need for the greatest caution against various more or less concealed neo-colonialist attempts to deprive the newly-acquired freedom of some of these countries of; genuine political and economical substance.
67.	In the Congo there is still foreign interference. Together with other countries here, we have always stressed that only the unity of the people, territorial integrity, the elimination of foreign mercenaries, the non-interference on the part of foreign Powers can lead to, and provide the basis for, a solution in the interests of the people, of the Congo and in the general interest. We consider that we should continue to insist on these points in accordance with the resolutions of our Organization, which are inspired by these aims.
68.	I must Emphasize here that the exercise of constant pressure from outside on a peace-loving country  — this time on Cambodia — is an inadmissible and very disquieting practice. Any form of pressure on an independent country — the more so if it is brought to bear precisely because of its policy of peaceful coexistence and non-alignment, as in the case with Cambodia — not only runs contrary to the principles of the United Nations Charter, but seriously endangers peace and security.
69.	In the sphere of international economic relations as well, negative elements and trends are still in evidence. They may even be said to be growing. The gap between the under-developed and the developed parts of the world is still widening dangerously. The negative tendencies which previously affected the world economy have been aggravated in recent years by the discriminatory policy of closed economic groupings. We are not, of course, opposed to regional economic integration which would lead to broader and higher forms of international economic cooperation and to an integration of the world economy. On the contrary, we should strive toward such a goal. However, it cannot be said that the present integration trends in Europe are leading towards such a goal. The World Economic Survey warns us that this tendency can become more pronounced in the future. It would be necessary, therefore, to analyse all the implications of the present processes of integration in order to find solutions guaranteeing a long-term prosperity of the world economy as a whole.
70.	There are thus still many causes for concern, and no small ones at that. All this requires the greatest vigilance and utmost efforts on the Carts of all forces which actively strive for the defence of peace and peaceful international co-operation.
71.	Tremendous is the responsibility which rests on the statesmen of the leading nuclear Powers. The world expects of them, and rightly demands, that they not only make statements in favour of peace, but that they untiringly and patiently seek solutions particularly to the problems which might Jeopardize the very future of mankind. Their meetings and conversations for the purpose of dispelling mutual misunderstanding and establishing confidence can be of exceptional importance. Certainly, among the many outstanding problems there are some which might be settled immediately. Such personal contacts can have only a favourable bearing on world developments. There is really no justification why this should not take place now, during this session. We say this also because we consider that international problems so fundamental as those of peace and war are the concern of all of us, of the entire international community, and that it is not the exclusive right of the big Powers to deal with them. It is the right of all, as well as the duty, to contribute to the extent of their capabilities, to the solution of these problems. The United Nations is, of course, the most appropriate place and framework for uniting our efforts towards that end.
72.	If account is taken of the demands of the majority of countries represented here — and we think it will be — the seventeenth session of the General Assembly can play a considerable part in the settlement of burning international problems.
73.	The Yugoslav delegation last year [1015th meeting] encouraged and welcomed the adoption of the agreed principles for negotiations on general and complete disarmament, as well as the establishment, of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, laying particular emphasis on the presence of non-aligned countries as a constructive factor in the discussion and settlement of this question of such vital importance to contemporary mankind.
74.	However, the Yugoslav delegation also stressed on that occasion that an agreement on the principles and the existence of a negotiating body could not in itself guarantee a successful outcome of the talks, if there was not a genuine willingness to renounce policies "from positions of strength" and to end the armaments race, which is an essential feature and a logical consequence of such policies.
75.	The detailed discussion of various aspects of disarmament which has taken place in the course of the Geneva talks has proved that it was not difficulties of an objective nature, of a technical or similar character, which stood in the way of the settlement of this problem — although such difficulties undoubtedly exist — but rather difficulties of a subjective nature. We are particularly strengthened in this belief by the conclusions unanimously adopted by the Consultative Group of Experts, who elaborated the well-known study on the Economic and Social Consequences of Disarmament, where it is said that: "All the problems and difficulties of transition connected with disarmament could be met by appropriate national and international measures. There should thus be no doubt that the diversion to peaceful purposes of the resources now in military use could be accomplished to the benefit of all countries and lead to the improvement of world Economic and social conditions.”
76.	The constructive efforts of the eight non-aligned countries, members of the Eighteen-Nation Committee, found their clearest expression in the proposal contained in the eight-nation memorandum, for a Cessation of nuclear tests. This memorandum, together with the statement of agreed principles of 20 September 1961 [A/4379], represent, in our opinion, the two most constructive documents which have come out of the discussions and negotiations in the course of the last twelve months. It is to be deplored that the leading nuclear Powers still give a different interpretation to the suggestions contained in the eight-nation memorandum, thus delaying an, agreement.
77.	Supporting general and complete disarmament, the Yugoslav delegation considers that, in the field of nuclear disarmament, the question of nuclear tests has first priority. In other terms, as correctly stated by the representative of Brazil [ 1125th meeting], possibilities for progress in the field of general and complete disarmament are very slim, if no result is achieved at least in reaching agreement on a nuclear cease-fire.
78.	The Yugoslav delegation, consistently maintaining the position that it has always held, strongly supports the demands for a cessation of all tests of nuclear weapons without delay. It is against all types of nuclear explosions for military purposes — atmospheric, under water, high-altitude and underground. Arguments regarding the chronological order or total number or total strength of nuclear tests of this or that nuclear Power cannot provide a justification for delaying a final cessation of nuclear tests,
79.	The Yugoslav delegation fully supports the eight- nation memorandum of 16 April 1962, and considers that the General Assembly should accept it as a basis for talks between the nuclear Powers.
80.	We also consider that absolute priority should be given to the problem of the cessation of nuclear tests as the most urgent question on the agenda of the Assembly. We are deeply concerned over the nuclear threats which, as the greatest and most terrifying danger, loom over mankind, a danger, which is increased by the continuation of nuclear tests. Therefore, we consider that the General Assembly must demand a Cessation of tests without any delay. We start here from the fact that existing differences, which relate only to underground tests, can be overcome. In that respect, the memorandum of the eight non-aligned countries provides, in the opinion of the Yugoslav delegation, a reasonable basis for an effective settlement of this problem, because it offers enough latitude for the discovery of a generally acceptable formula for an agreement on the prohibition of all types of nuclear tests, including underground tests. Furthermore, we are in principle, in favour of establishing denuclearized zones and of all other measures of disarmament which can be attained by agreement.
81.	Disarmament plays a decisive role in the strengthening of peace. But, at the same time, one should not forget that is also opens great prospects for the economic and social advancement of all countries. Studies dealing with this problem, including the above-mentioned study of the Group of Experts, leave a very deep impression and are a further reason for the leaders of the big Powers to consider their historic responsibilities before the peoples of their countries and mankind as a whole.
82.	In keeping with the consistent policy of my Government, which is strongly opposed to nuclear tests, regardless of who engages in them and regardless of the so-called reasons by which they are justified, the Yugoslav delegation will make its active contribution to the efforts aimed at reaching an agreement on this issue as soon as possible.
83.	There are several items on the agenda of this session covering the most important problems of economic development. This, of course, is not by accident. We can say without any exaggeration that never in history has the challenge or economic growth and human progress been of such essential importance to mankind as today. In other terms, the need for joint resolute efforts has never been more urgent.
84.	No lasting peace can prevail in a world in which industrially advanced countries spend every year on armaments almost the equivalent of what all the developing countries together manage to produce. Nor can we expect that the purposes of the Charter can be implemented when the trends of development and practical actions further widen the gap between the economically advanced and the developing countries.
85.	In this context, the problem of the economic advancement of the developing countries, which represent more than one-half of mankind, is, we think, the main problem of the world economy today. We consider, therefore, that our Organization should bend all its efforts towards their solution.
86.	Our preoccupation is, accordingly, a matter of general importance and should be seriously considered if we which to achieve the prosperity and peace so ardently desired by the peoples of the world.
87,	Bearing in mind constantly the need for co-operation on a basis of equality and the mutual interdependence of all countries of the world the developing countries have the right to demand a more equitable distribution of wealth and the necessary international co-operation towards that end, This is essential not only to their own development, but also to the further progress and prosperity of the highly developed countries and of the entire international community, This, in addition to comprehensive national efforts within each individual country, is one of the necessary paths leading towards a more rapid progress in the developing countries, This would have a stabilizing effect on the international economy and on peaceful development in the world.
88,	The developing countries do not desire more than mutually beneficial co-operation on an equal footing. They strive for the speediest possible development on a basis of equality and3 international trade free from pressure or discrimination. That is what the developing countries seek, and It was these preoccupations and apprehensions which led to the Cairo Conference, which brought together, in July of this year, representatives of thirty-six developing Countries, That Conference indicated, in its Declaration the paths to be followed for the settlement of a number of acute world economic problems.
89.	The countries assembled at the Cairo Conference are fully aware of their systematic and planned mobilization of all national resources and the carrying out of such institutional changes within national economic structures as would make possible an accelerated economic growth. The results achieved in the implementation of national plans development undoubtedly open up growing possibilities for international economic co-operation.
90.	While endeavouring to intensify the mutual trade exchanges, the developing countries request the highly developed countries to adopt measures leading to an expansion of international trade on a basis of equality and non-discrimination. Members of economically integrated groupings are called upon to change their policies and adopt measures designed to increase their imposts from developing countries and to facilitate their industrialization.
91.	Unfortunately, there has so far been no favourable public response on their part. At the same time, opinions are voiced in the highly developed countries that a removal of trade barriers would result in such an increase of imports from developing countries as would lead to serious difficulties for, and the disruption, their economies. I would not like for the moment to go into the question of whether this is really the essential point, or whether other well-known motives are involved. I should like only to say a few words about the views and misgivings voiced in highly developed countries. In our opinion, it is time for the highly developed countries also to take practical measures in order to adapt themselves to the great new changes that have taken place in the world, in general and in the economic field in particular. So long as the highly developed countries are not ready to carryout structural changes in their economies, so long as they are not ready to make room for products from developing countries, one cannot expect them to achieve a reasonable rate of growth. Likewise, one cannot expect the developing countries to go on buying capital goods and machinery when they are not able to pay for them by the sale of their products. The, developing countries are thus faced with a situation in which they are left behind in the rate of economic development and compelled to buy heavy equipment, capital goods and machinery at rising prices, while the prices of primary commodities which they are able to sell have either remained stagnant or suffered a decline. This is an untenable situation, fraught with great danger. It calls for urgent measures, first of all on the part of the highly developed countries. If the highly developed countries really wish to consider a long-term growth of the world economy, they have to carry out essential structural changes and a new orientation in their industry.
92.	In their Declaration, the developing countries meeting at Cairo request the United Nations to take steps for the purpose of stabilizing international trade in primary products, measures against protectionism and similar policies practised by highly developed countries. In this connexion, they consider that general agreement on Tariffs and Trade should be adapted, in organizational and other respects, to the existing situation as soon as possible, and that its contracting parties should take "immediate and energetic" action towards the improvement of the terms of trade of developing countries. The International Monetary Fund should likewise find a more effective solution than it has so far for covering the balance-of-payments deficit of the developing countries.
93.	As to the problems of international financing, the Cairo Declaration stresses that financing had not so far been able, either as regards its volume or its form; to meet the needs of t developing countries, financing should be adapted to the needs of national, plans of development and serve the economic emancipation of developing countries, which can best be attained by appropriate means of public financing. The Conference recommends that the industrial countries should set apart one per cent of their national incomes „ for the investment requirements of developing countries. Savings obtained from disarmament should serve for the same purpose. The general purposes of financing could most successfully be achieved through the United Nations. It is therefore essential that the resources of the International Bank and of the Special Fund be increased and that the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development (SUNFED) commence its operations without further delay. To that same end it is requested that technical assistance — particularly that which is carried out through the United Nations — should be increased, improved and adapted to the new needs.
94.	The United Nations has so far failed to take the necessary steps to enable it to take practical action towards, accomplishing the purposes of the United Nations Development Decade. The Cairo Conference and its results are a significant contribution towards the achievement of those aims. That means that the goals set by the Cairo Conference are identical to those of the United Nations. The Conference has initiated activities which are to be carried out through our Organization and, to that end, it unanimously decided to submit the Declaration to this session of the General Assembly for consideration as a separate item of the agenda.
95.	Aware of the far-reaching effect of the measures proposed in the field of economic development, the Cairo Conference has requested that a world economic conference be convened, early next year for the purpose of making an essential contribution to the removal of obstacles which stand in the way of international trade and development.
96.	Almost fifteen years have elapsed since the Havana Conference, whose Charter, unfortunately, has never been put into effect, In the meantime fundamental changes have taken place in the world economy. One-half of mankind has embarked upon a course of independent economic development, and the central economic problem in highly developed countries has shifted more and more from the post-war problem of employment to the problems of economic growth. The new world economic problems with which we are faced call for a new approach to their solution. We cannot and should not continue the old routine and seek the solution of world economic problems through temporary adaptations. If we wish to achieve genuine and effective results, we must proceed in a planned and organized manner. The world economic conference should, in that respect, be a working forum; it should lend a new approach to the whole subject of international economic co-operation and propose concrete action. Our Organization can no longer remain a passive on-looker of world economic trends, and problems. It should rather become an active factor and take urgent and practical measures.
97.	I am confident that at this session the Assembly will devote serious attention to the significant economic problems on the agenda and take the steps required by the present situation towards their early solution.
98.	In this statement I was not able to deal with all the problems in this field, but our delegation will have the opportunity, I hope, in subsequent interventions, to offer certain suggestions and submit proposals when specific questions are under discussion.
99.	In Conclusion, I should like to say a few words about the role and functions of our Organization under present conditions. Along with the world and international relations, the United Nations has itself developed. The Organization is more and more becoming a factor contributing to progressive development, to the maintenance of peace and to further co-operation among nations. The progress of the Organization in that direction will be more rapid if all its Members make greater use of it so that it may serve as a forum for attenuating and overcoming divisions between the blocs and other contradictions which divide the present world. Through the growth of its membership, and by acquiring a universal Character, our Organization itself must undergo a constant evolution and become more and more democratic in its structure; expanding the fields of its useful activities and becoming capable of fulfilling the hopes and needs of all its Members. This is all the more so as there are also negative tendencies and attempts to diminish the importance and the role of the United Nations.
100,	Of course, positive efforts aimed at solving international problems and strengthening peace and international co-operation can be made, and are in fact made, outside the United Nations also. All sincere efforts in that direction are valuable and should be welcomed. However, because the United Nations reflects the world with increasing accuracy, and because of its growing ability to contribute to progressive changes, it is and it should be the place where all the positive contributions of countries to the collective efforts towards peace and international co-operation may find expression,
101.	We may state with satisfaction that Secretary- General U Thant has greatly contributed to such a trend in the activities of our Organization, and we express our hope that he will continue to perform his functions successfully in the future as well.
