48.	I should like to begin my statement by saying that one of the founders of the United Nations has departed from a world in which, in so many ways, he played a role achieved by only few men in this century of the greatest achievements and events in the history of mankind. The death of Sir Winston Churchill is a grave event indeed. On this solemn occasion my Government has already offered its deep condolences to the Government of the United Kingdom and its people, with whom Afghanistan maintains a most cordial relationship. On behalf of the delegation of Afghanistan, I wish to convey through you, Mr. President, our most sincere condolences to the delegation of the United Kingdom here in the General Assembly, and to give expression to our profound sorrow, which we share not only with the delegation of the United Kingdom, but also with all Members of the General Assembly.
49.	Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you most sincerely on your election to the Presidency of this session of the General Assembly. I have known you personally for a long time, and I have full confidence that the nineteenth session of the General Assembly will make a constructive contribution to the achievement of the ultimate ends of the United Nations under your Presidency.
50.	It is also with great and heartfelt pleasure that the Afghan delegation welcomes Malawi, Malta and Zambia as new Members of the United Nations. The attainment of independence by these countries is not only a great victory for their own people but for all Members of the United Nations which have respected their rightful aspirations. Their membership in the Organization has strengthened the United Nations by new constructive forces in pursuit of peace and progress for all mankind.
51.	Since we last met in this Assembly and spoke about Afghanistan, I can now tell you of the continuation of satisfactory achievements in my country in the implementation of economic and social plans for the general development of Afghanistan.
52.	At the eighteenth session [1224th meeting], I referred to one point bearing upon our political and social reforms, and I reported that a new' constitution was being drafted based on principles of democracy derived from the spirit of our people and their deep conviction in the venerated principles of equality, human dignity, freedom of the individual and social justice.
53.	At the current session, I am happy to inform you that this Constitution was adopted. The new constitution recognizes the national life of the Afghans according to the requirements of the time and as the right of all human societies. It enshrines justice and equality for all and establishes political, economic and social democracy. It ensures the liberty and welfare of the individual, and aims ultimately at forming a prosperous and progressive society based on the preservation of human dignity. It is based solely on democratic principles. It conforms with the principles and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and the respect for the rights of the human person as enunciated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
54.	In the international sphere during the period between the last session and this session of the General Assembly, Afghanistan has followed its traditional policy of friendly relations on the basis of peaceful coexistence and co-operation with u nations regardless of differences in political, economic and social systems. We have not only succeeded in maintaining our relations of friendship and co-operation with the countries of our own continent, of Africa and of the Americas, but, to our great satisfaction, we have expanded such relations in all these continents. We have greatly benefited particularly by establishing and strengthening our co-operation in economic and cultural areas.
55.	In achieving these goals we feel grateful to all those friendly countries from whom we have received co-operation and assistance. By this they have shown their full understanding of our problems and our policies, with an appreciation of our sincerity.
56.	I also wish to give expression to our appreciation of the co-operation and assistance we have received from the various organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies. We feel confident that in the light of more knowledge of our needs and problems, and particularly a clear understanding of our co-operation and the hard work we have undertaken by ourselves for the betterment of conditions, this assistance and cooperation will be enhanced.
57.	In this general debate I should like briefly to refer only to the major problems and activities which my delegation thinks the Assembly should be reminded of. One of these is the result of the work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held last year in Geneva, as one of the most important and promising achievements of the United Nations. Afghanistan has noted the deliberations of this Conference with satisfaction. The Conference had the merit of defining for the first time the tremendous economic and trade problems with which developing countries are confronted and must contend. It was able to consider the global pattern of trade and its relationship with the economic development of the developing countries in a new perspective which once again, and more clearly, emphasizes the fact that the international community cannot live in harmony and peace as long as the prevailing urgent economic problems are not solved by international co-operation and understanding among all nations, regardless of their level of development.
58.	Afghanistan particularly notes the work undertaken at the Conference regarding the transit trade of the land-locked countries. We hope that the conference of plenipotentiaries recommended to be convened in 1965 will be held in an atmosphere of more understanding of the difficulties with which these countries are confronted, and that it will adopt a convention which will contribute to the normalization and promotion of trade for the countries which have no access to the sea. Afghanistan believes that such a legal instrument should come into existence, and that essentially it is only by legally binding international agreements suited to the conditions of our time that we can seek a realistic and reliable understanding among nations.
59.	We wish to express our satisfaction that the nineteenth session of the General Assembly, in spite of its having met with unusual difficulties, was able to carry out the measures necessary for the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, with the Trade and Development Board as a permanent organ of this body of the General Assembly. The co-operation of the entire membership of the Organization on this matter, particularly in unusual circumstances, should be noted as a hopeful measure for understanding and co-operation.
60.	The solidarity of the Group of Seventy-seven is of great historic importance as a realization of the significance of international co-operation for creating conditions in which peace can be realized and maintained, but it is in no way less important to note the general political understanding of the entire membership based on the recognition of the principles of mutual benefit in world affairs which, if continued, will result in a peaceful and prosperous life for all.
61.	The urgency of the convening of the session of the Board at the earliest possible time should not be ignored in any circumstances, to enable the new institutions to take practical measures to fulfil the aspirations of the Geneva gathering — which succeeded only in preparing the groundwork.
62.	During the period between Assembly sessions, Afghanistan also participated in the Conference of the Non-Aligned Nations held in Cairo. This was a conference dealing with matters of peace and progress and therefore in conformity with the desire of all those countries which believe that their efforts for strengthening the United Nations by international cooperation leading to peace, freedom, and equality should not be confined only to their efforts in one place or on one occasion.
63.	The Prime Minister of Afghanistan stated at the Cairo Conference that Afghanistan, as a devoted Member of the United Nations, supports any measures for the strengthening of the Organization within the Organization and elsewhere.
64.	The Cairo Conference was a gathering of the forces of construction seeking a positive answer to the demands of humanity for a peaceful and better life. At this Conference, Afghanistan expressed its appreciation for the progress made in the direction of the elimination of colonialism, but at the same time it stressed that colonialism had not been eliminated in all its forms and manifestations and it condemned the domination of any people by any alien Power in any part of the world.
65.	While the importance of the limited test ban was emphasized, it was accompanied by our great concern that tests were not banned in all environments and that the destruction of existing nuclear weapons is still an urgent job to be done. The continuation of the nuclear and non-nuclear armaments race as well as the tension between opposing military camps were a further source of concern.
66.	The most important issue of our time, that is to say, the achievement of agreements which would lead to general and complete disarmament under strict international control, is in great need of decisive and immediate steps. Afghanistan would join with those countries which would collectively pursue their interest in bringing about real progress in this field by practical and positive measures.
67.	Afghanistan holds the opinion that disarmament can be achieved only if peaceful coexistence provides the world with the confidence required. If suggested, Afghanistan will support the idea of seeking the agreement of all concerned for the purpose of convening an international conference on disarmament.
68.	While we support the establishment of atom-free zones which, if continually extended, would lead us to an atom-free world, we shall give our support to agreements between all nuclear Powers for a fresh and universal approach to the problem of nuclear test bans in all environments.
69.	The role played by the non-aligned nations was in conformity with Afghanistan's basic international policy of an impartial evaluation of the world situation, based on independent judgement, in the interest only of peace with full realization of our responsibilities as objective members of the international community.
70.	In this connexion I would refer to what was stated by the Prime Minister of Afghanistan: "It is by proving to the world that our mission is one of good will, that our actions are directed by reason, that our determination is our goal, that we can hope for full understanding of our purposes and aims."
71.	Afghanistan reaffirmed its belief in the principles of coexistence and asked for a clearer understanding of these principles through their codification and declaration to the world as principles which would include mutual respect for all; support of the right of all nations to choose their own political, economic, and social systems; respect for the undeniable and inherent right of all peoples to self-determination; restraint from any policy of political, military, or economic pressure in any form; and solutions of all disputes by peaceful ,means without using force or the threat of force.
72.	We reaffirmed our belief that most thoughtful consideration was imperative in dealing with disputes between nations, and solutions must be sought only by peaceful negotiations; that these disputes have more significance when they exist between neighbouring countries, but the most despicable are the ones where alien Powers continue attempts to suppress the .right of peoples to self-determination; that alien domination in any form and by anyone anywhere should be equally as unacceptable as is the classic form of Western colonialism, and, therefore, should be equally doomed to condemnation and abolition; that in all cases, and with no exceptions, the will of the people and their right to decide their own destiny should be considered the just method for the establishment of peace and better relations between peoples and nations.
73.	Afghanistan stressed the importance of this work in the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, as it has always done in the United Nations, and wishes to do now.
74.	The principle of peaceful settlement of the problems of the divided nations and the differences between countries concerning border disputes needs urgent attention. This was reaffirmed by the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries. From the general debate in the United Nations it is clear that other Members of the United Nations share this view. I personally welcome the emphasis put on this point by the distinguished Minister for External Affairs of Pakistan in his statement of general policy the other day [1319th meeting] and also today in his speech exercising the right of reply. We earnestly hope that this principle of the peaceful settlement of border and other disputes between countries will be universally accepted and supported.
75.	When the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries was in session in Cairo, many messages of good will were sent from all parts of the world, including the ones sent by the Heads of State and Government of countries that did not belong to the non-aligned part of the world. Afghanistan gave a full expression of appreciation to these messages and interpreted them as a good sign of better understanding of the policies of non-alignment. The Prime Minister of Afghanistan called upon the non-aligned nations to interpret them as such and suggested that they "should try to strengthen this understanding by an objective evaluation of the major- world problems ". We emphasize this suggestion here in the General Assembly of the United Nations.
76.	We expressed the hope that these countries, particularly the major Powers, would co-operate with each other on matters of peace, particularly through the United Nations.
77.	We have pledged positive support for the hopes cherished by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as expressed in his message to the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries. The Prime Minister of Afghanistan stated: "The United Nations is the only place of hope for saving mankind from destruction. This Conference is only a part of the United Nations. The solidarity of the non-aligned nations is already a great contribution to the work of the United Nations. Its unity on matters of peace and war will, in fact, further this contribution. Afghanistan, with other non- aligned nations, pledges itself fully to respect and support the United Nations Charter, once again and for all time."
78.	Mr. President, as you see, the aspiration of my Government and my people in relation to the United Nations is explicitly one of deep and unshaken conviction, and this session of the General Assembly was meant to be attended by the Afghan delegation with greater expectations, particularly because it was a session preceding the International Co-operation Year.
79.	For our part, we intended to join Members of the Assembly in looking back to the seconds, minutes, and hours of the nineteen years of the life of the Organization and, after so doing, endeavour to join them in paving the way for our entry into the twentieth year with steady and firm steps in the direction of achieving our ultimate goals as held in the aspirations and demands of the peoples of the United Nations. We still cherish this hope.
80.	However, most unfortunately, the beginning of the session was marked by certain disagreements so that the normal functions of the Assembly were threatened by differences of views on some basic principles. Perhaps this in itself was enough to make us feel deeply concerned over the situation. But when the efforts to overcome the situation were not successful in bringing our anxieties to an end, it became more unfortunate to the extent that the world was given the impression that the urgency of the major international problems may be almost overshadowed by what is referred to as the "financial crisis".
81.	Even at this rather late hour when the general debate is coming to an end, no agreement on how to overcome the immediate crisis has been reached. The fact that the crisis is not merely a financial one, simply increases our anxiety, and this factor has to some extent changed, in the minds of many of us, the meaning and the sense of what is recognized as patience and hope for the solution to the problem.
82.	However, at no time has the Afghan delegation been discouraged. We have watched the developments with great concern, sharing at all times the conviction expressed by the Secretary-General "that it is not beyond the capacity of reasonable men to reach reasonable accommodations, if there is a will to reach them" [1315th meeting, para. 15], and we join him in the appeal he made to the Members of this Organization, as a matter of urgency, to co-operate in devising ways and means to rectify the situation.
83.	Mr. President, you also have made similar appeals.
84.	The Afghan delegation would like to have the opportunity to be a part of a unanimous, collective, positive response to any constructive measures in the interest of the Organization to enable this session of the General Assembly to function normally and to give the Members of the United Nations an opportunity to take in hand a comprehensive review of the entire matter as soon as possible.
85.	In the consideration of such matters it is not difficult for any one of us to understand that no individual Member can afford a departure from the basic political and legal position it holds, but it should be equally easy to understand that co-operative effort by all Members, with the aim of strengthening the United Nations and of creating an atmosphere in which the future may be harmoniously planned, should not be an impossibility.
86.	Rightly or wrongly, it has been mentioned frequently during the past weeks that the prestige of a number of countries might be threatened if they were to reconsider their positions. It is difficult to understand how this could be, particularly when the appeals made to them by a majority of the Members of the United Nations have been accompanied by suggestions only of general principles for them and for the rest of the Assembly to consider as a basis for negotiations, in order that an agreement for the normalization of the work of the Assembly may be reached by all Members at this session without any prejudice to any basic political and legal positions.
87.	What could eliminate the fear of losing a point of position or face more than an appeal by this world Organization, where everyone can state his position and reserve his right, after co-operating to make it possible, to work in a normal atmosphere?
88.	Everyone is cognizant of the complexity of the problem; but we also know that it can be solved only with time, in a normal atmosphere, and by a comprehensive review of the total problem. If a confrontation is allowed, it will not be an act of wisdom by an Assembly which acted with wisdom and goodwill successfully on much more complex problems. The complexity is indeed in the political nature of the problem. The solution can be sought only through a political agreement. No procedural attempt will lead to a solution.
89.	The decision of the African-Asian group to request the Secretary-General to try to bring about an agreement by negotiation was a wise one, and, in the opinion of the Afghan delegation, should be the only course to be followed. My delegation thinks that with the well-considered absence of any definite proposal imposed on the Assembly or on some Members of the Assembly, and with the existence of certain concrete practical ideas based on general principles, only as a basis for negotiation, there is a good opportunity for all to reach an agreement. This requires an agreement to put aside the differences in the interest of the Organization and relieve it of the present situation without prejudice to any positions hitherto taken.
90.	In the general debate last year [1224th meeting] the Afghan delegation, in connexion with the annual report of the Secretary-General, stated that the strengthening of the United Nations at that stage in international affairs was of more significance than it had ever been. This year an emphasis on this point seems to be more relevant. We have to keep reminding ourselves of the achievements of the Organization and the increasing responsibilities it has undertaken. It will be an unpleasant reading of history when it determines the real causes of such disagreements, particularly for those of us who would deny their utmost co-operation for solutions to the present problems. In the meantime, none of us who has the opportunity to stand here and speak his mind can afford to leave this rostrum without emphasizing the importance of the fact that an organization should be strong financially, but at the same time realizing that it cannot be an effective organization if it is weak politically.
91.	In this grave situation each one of us can weaken the Organization and only all of us can strengthen it. It is our conviction that the United Nations will emerge stronger from the present crisis, in the same way it has managed through past crises. Even the last-moment statements of inflexible positions should not discourage the Members of this great assembly of nations, individually or collectively. Such discouragement is more dangerous than any delay in reaching agreement. On the contrary, the final explanations of different points of view should be objectively understood, which understanding should serve the purpose of finding a desirable solution. We strongly hope that we shall not be proven wrong.
92.	All of us are acquainted with the items on the provisional agenda of this session, about most of which I have deliberately not made any observations. This omission on the part of my delegation at this stage is only to put more emphasis, by brevity, on the importance of enabling the Assembly to function in an effective way, with the hope that at the end of this general debate we shall have an opportunity to continue our efforts to make a contribution to the work of the Assembly by expressing our views during its consideration of the items on its agenda.