47.	First of all, Mr. President, allow me to offer you the cordial congratulations of the delegation of the People’s Republic of Albania on your election to the office of President of this session of the United Nations General Assembly.
48.	The delegation of the People’s Republic of Albania sincerely welcomes the admission of three newly independent States, Malawi, Malta and Zambia. We rejoice that more than half the States Members of the United Nations have achieved national independence since the creation of our Organization, thanks to their long and heroic struggle. We are convinced that the day is not far off when the representatives of the other peoples who are struggling against colonial oppression will come to swell our ranks.
49.	At this time, when we are beginning the work of the nineteenth session, we cannot but note with regret the abnormal and extraordinary circumstances in which the General Assembly is meeting this year.
50.	In the present state of international tension, when in many parts of the world people are engaged in a bitter struggle against the forces of obscurantism and war at the very time when, in accordance with the Charter, the United Nations should be playing a most active and effective role in protecting the inalienable rights of peoples to freedom, equality and independence and preserving mankind from a fresh world conflict, our Organization seems to be paralysed and shaken to its very foundations.
51.	The General Assembly has met without knowing what it is going to do, without having adopted an agenda, without knowing the questions it will consider or how it will proceed, without having set up its General Committee or the Main Committees, deprived of the right to consider the urgent problems of the moment and even of the right to vote; the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and the fundamental provisions of the Charter have literally been thrown overboard.
52.	Worse still, the decisions relating to our work and perhaps even to the future of our Organization are being reached outside the General Assembly and without its knowledge, the role of the Assembly being reduced to merely approving without opposition, as though it was in need of a guardian or was to be a docile puppet in the hands of a certain great Power.
53.	The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania associates itself with the large number of delegations which find such a state of affairs unacceptable. The equality and sovereignty of Member States are the very foundations of our Organization. We have come here from all over the world to make our countries' contribution to the work of peace which, according to the Charter, is the primary purpose of our Organization, and not to stand by powerless while the United Nations disintegrates.
54.	We must recognize that the United Nations has reached the present deadlock because of the wrong practices, contrary to the Charter, which have been forced upon it more than once in the past by the United States of America. That country, with the direct or indirect support of some other Member States, has always tried, and is still trying, to use the United Nations as a convenient instrument for its own policy, which is contrary to the interests of the world's peoples and of peace. Fearing that its hold on the United Nations might be weakened by the admission of a large number of recently liberated countries, and with other shameful designs in mind, the United States is again trying to impose its own policy on the Organization under cover of a financial crisis which it has created and by the use of blackmail. My delegation is convinced that Member States like our own, to which the cause of national sovereignty and the principles of the Charter are dear, will not be made the cat's-paw of such a policy, that they will make concerted efforts to end the present impossible situation and to put the General Assembly and the whole Organization back onto the right path.
55.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania has on many occasions clearly stated its attitude to the United Nations forces and to the expenditure relating to their maintenance. It is common knowledge that these forces were established and have been used for purposes which were diametrically opposed to those of the Charter and to the sovereign rights of peoples. I need only mention the case of Korea and of the Congo. My Government has always firmly opposed the use of United Nations forces against peoples and has always maintained that all expenditure relating to these forces must be borne by the aggressors. Our position, which remains unchanged, is determined by a question of principle, namely, that only action taken in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and its relevant provisions can create obligations for Member States.
56.	States which are rightly refusing to pay for these forces cannot be forced to do so by a distorted interpretation of Article 19 of the Charter; such an interpretation can only serve the interests of those who wish to undermine the United Nations. The present crisis is an eloquent proof of this.
57.	Our delegation feels that the Assembly should free itself from the present irregularities without further delay and tackle the important tasks that lie before it.
58.	An objective consideration of the international situation compels us to admit that in several parts of the world, such as South-East Asia, Africa and the Caribbean, Europe and Cyprus, the Middle East and others, international peace and security are threatened, that the divided countries — Germany, Viet-Nam and Korea — are still constant sources of tension, that the arms race is being accelerated and that no big international problem has been solved.
59.	The Charter places Member States under an obligation not to intervene in the domestic affairs of other countries and to refrain from the threat or use of force against other States. Unfortunately, these principles are not respected by all Member States. Although the United States of America is one of the signatories and depositories of the United Nations Charter, it has systematically made the threat and use of force an instrument of its policy.
60.	For instance, for nearly six years it has constantly been plotting and committing acts of aggression against Cuba, for the simple reason that the Cuban people have dared to carry out a revolution and to take the glorious path of socialism. As Mr. Guevara, the leader of the Cuban delegation, indicated the other day, with supporting evidence, fresh preparations for an invasion of Cuba are under way. In an attempt to justify the continued hostile activities against Cuba, Mr. Stevenson, the United States representative, stated, inter alia, that his country had made and was still making flights over Cuba for espionage purposes because it had been authorized to do so by the Organization of American States. That was tantamount to saying that the sovereignty of any country is at the mercy of a few resolutions passed by various regional organizations directed by Mr. Stevenson's Government. We consider this to be a very serious statement, a challenge to the national sovereignty of States, to international law and to the United Nations.
61.	In reaffirming the complete solidarity of the people and Government of the People's Republic of Albania with their Cuban brothers, my delegation declares that the United Nations cannot remain indifferent to this attitude and to the aggressive activities against Cuba.
62. An extremely dangerous situation has been created in South-East Asia. For nearly twenty years South Korea has been under United States military occupation and, under cover of the United Nations flag, it has been transformed into a veritable concentration camp for the South Korean people and into a nuclear arsenal.
63. In complete disregard of the Charter, solemn agreements and of international law, the United States has intervened openly in the civil war in Laos, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cambodia pointed out to this Assembly; it is committing aggressive acts against Cambodia because that country is following an independent national policy; in South Viet-Nam, it has for several years been waging a barbarous war against the heroic people of South Viet-Nam, who are fighting for freedom, independence and self- determination. Faced with the intrepid resistance of these people, who are united in a national liberation front and determined to die rather than give in, the foreign interventionists and their puppets in Saigon are rushing headlong to catastrophe and to total and inevitable defeat. The efforts to internationalize the conflict in South Viet-Nam by bringing the countries members of SEATO and of the United Nations into it have been in vain. Recently, there have been several events and official statements which show that the United States is intending to extend the war to North Viet-Nam. As you are aware, on 5 August 1964 it committed an unprovoked act of aggression in the Gulf of Tonkin and since then, even in the last few days, its military aircraft and warships have been continuing their provocation and committing real acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. Its false allegations that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam is intervening in the domestic affairs of South Viet-Nam are as ridiculous as the statements made here by certain speakers who alleged that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam is responsible for the events in Laos. These allegations come from one source only — Washington — and have only one purpose — to justify the intervention in South Viet-Nam and Laos, and to prepare world opinion for aggression against North Viet-Nam.
64.	We vigorously denounce these tendentious allegations and dangerous plans. It is a well-known fact that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, a most peace-loving country, has scrupulously respected the Geneva agreements on Indo-China and that it is another Power that has intervened in the civil war in Viet-Nam and Laos, has sent its armed forces and made war on the people of South Viet-Nam, and is bombing the Laotian people and provoking Cambodia. There is no doubt that the extension of the war to North Viet-Nam would only hasten the inevitable defeat of the aggressors and arouse even more violent indignation against them among the peoples of the entire world.
65.	The people and Government of the People’s Republic of Albania reaffirm their strong support for the independent countries and for the peoples of South-East Asia that are struggling against imperialism. We call for the immediate cessation of all forms of United States intervention in this area. We protest against any attempt to use the United Nations, its organs or its name in connexion, with the countries of Indo-China. We consider that the only just way to peace in Indo-China and to the peaceful unification of Viet-Nam lies in the immediate withdrawal of the United States interventionist forces from this area, the strict application of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Indo-China and of the 1962 agreements on Laos, and the complete cessation of aggressive acts against peace-loving Cambodia. Similarly, the withdrawal of the United States armed forces from South Korea continues to be the essential condition for the freedom, independence and self-determination of the South Korean people and for the peaceful unification of Korea.
66.	In the heart of Africa, the heroic people of Patrice Lumumba’s Congo are still being persecuted and murdered although their only crime is that they want to be free and independent.
67.	For nearly eighty years, the soil of the Congo has been drenched in the blood of the millions of its children who have been massacred by the colonialists in the name of Western civilization. During the last four years, Patrice Lumumba and his compatriots have been murdered by the imperialists under cover of the United Nations flag. Recently at Stanleyville the Congolese patriots were machine-gunned by the same aggressors in the name of the humanitarian feelings of the white race. The aim has always been the same: to crush and eliminate the national liberation movement and to retain the rich uranium, copper and diamond deposits of the Congo in the Western monopolies.
68.	The attack on Stanleyville was a gross violation of international law and of the obligations incumbent on all States Members of the United Nations. It has filled all nations with indignation. It constitutes an attack directed against all African peoples and a serious threat to international security.
69.	In expressing the deep sympathy of the Albanian people for the Congolese people’s struggle for liberation, the Albanian delegation associates itself with the delegations of the countries which are asking that foreign intervention in the Congo should cease forthwith and that the Congolese people should be left to solve their own problems in freedom.
70.	The German problem is a crucial problem for European and world security. The Albanian Government considers that the interests of peace and security require the early conclusion of a peace treaty with Germany, with the two existing German sovereign States, or even with the German Democratic Republic alone, and that the question of West Berlin should be settled on that basis. Any delay in this matter and any bargaining with the Bonn Government at the expense of the German people is a disservice to those people and to the cause of peace; it encourages the expansionist designs harboured by the vindictive militarists in power in West Germany against the German Democratic Republic and other neighbouring countries; and it precludes a just solution of the German problem itself.
71.	We reaffirm our support for the simultaneous admission of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations.
72.	The resounding victories of the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America over colonialism are of great historical significance. The revolutionary struggle of the oppressed independent peoples is moving rapidly towards certain and final victory. Meanwhile, however, tens of millions of human beings are still suffering under the colonial yoke in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and we cannot agree with those who claim that colonialism is about to die a natural death and that, in the interests of peaceful coexistence, the oppressed peoples should endure the colonial yoke and wait until they are offered freedom by the colonialists. Events in South Viet-Nam, the Congo, North Borneo, Southern Arabia, the Portuguese colonies in Africa, Southern Rhodesia, British Guiana and South Africa prove that the colonialists and neocolonialist Powers not only are unwilling to implement the United Nations Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples but have formed a coalition, a "holy alliance" against the peoples fighting for their freedom.
73.	Racism is another abhorrent form of oppression of coloured people by Whites. In South Arica the fascist policies of apartheid are applied with increasing severity, while in the land of Abraham Lincoln the Blacks are subjected to humiliating segregation and are the victims of persecution and lynching. We feel that where South Africa is concerned the General Assembly should not be content with recommendations which are not heeded by the allies and partners of the South African racists, but should declare apartheid to be incompatible with membership of the United Nations, with the attendant consequences.
74.	As it has officially informed the United Nations, the Albanian Government has had no relations with South Africa and will maintain that position until the South African Government abandons its apartheid policies.
75.	The People's Republic of Albania has supported and will always support the struggle of the oppressed peoples and nations. This struggle has now entered the phase of complete victory and the efforts of the Powers which have a stake in maintaining the colonial system either in its old form or in the form of neocolonialism are doomed to failure.
76.	The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania considers that unless we want the 1960 Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples to remain a mere wish, the General Assembly should take effective steps to make a real contribution to the struggle of the peoples for the total liquidation of the colonial system.
77.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania considers that every nation is entitled to take the appropriate steps to protect and consolidate its political and economic sovereignty. The big oil, copper, tin, rubber and coffee monopolies are bastions of colonialism and neo-colonialism. The efforts of the independent States of Africa, Asia and Latin America to take over and work their natural resources for their own benefit are not only legitimate but essential to the development of their national economies.
78.	The experience of several countries, including Albania, shows that the national economy can be consolidated and can flourish by developing its productive capacity and relying on its own strength. We consider that the recently liberated countries need foreign economic aid, too, but such aid should be fair and fraternal and should be used for the consolidation of the national independence of the recipient countries, for the cause of the liberation of peoples and their progress, and for the struggle against imperialism and colonialism. The small developing countries of Africa and other continents rightly reject aid to which conditions are attached or which is given as alms or used to rob them of their natural resources, to exert pressure upon them or to plan intrigues against them. As we maintained at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development we consider that international trade, too, should develop on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, and should further the progress of the recently liberated countries and not the neo-colonialist interests and designs of the former metropolitan countries and industrialized countries.
79.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania has never slackened its efforts towards the achievement of general and complete disarmament, that just demand of peace-loving peoples and countries. We must draw attention to the fact that the negotiations of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament at Geneva have so far led to no results. We cannot ignore the fact that, while disappointing negotiations are taking place in Geneva, the Western Powers, and first and foremost the United States of America, are intensifying the arms race and taking further steps along the path to war.
80.	The illusions that were so loudly propagated last year with regard to the Moscow Treaty have not lasted long. At the last session of the General Assembly the Albanian delegation denounced the fraudulent and dangerous nature of the treaty, which was heralded as a great success on the road to disarmament. The facts have shown — and this point has been stressed in many statements from this rostrum during the current session — that the treaty has not slowed down the arms race at all but that on the contrary it has given the United States of America legal sanction to continue the underground tests which it requires in order to develop the production of new nuclear missiles to the full and to continue the policy of atomic blackmail. It is noteworthy that on 5 August 1964, the very day on which the United States Government made a peaceful statement to mark the first anniversary of the signing of the Moscow Treaty, that same Government launched an unprovoked attack on the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam in the Gulf of Tonkin. Current events in various parts of the globe are proving once again that imperialism pays lip service to pacifism in order to hoodwink the peoples of the world and to conceal its aggressive acts.
81.	Similarly, the so-called agreement on the limitation of the production of fissionable material is a hoax. Since the United States has an excess production of such material, it is interested in slowing down production. The agreement in question in no way affects existing stocks or the manufacture of nuclear weapons; it does not ban their use nor does it in any way reduce the danger of a nuclear war. The rulers of the United States boast that in the past four years it has greatly increased its investment in military preparations, that it is the strongest country in history and that by 1970 it will have two and a half times as many nuclear warheads as at present.
82.	It is understandable that a Government which proclaims such a programme should not be in favour of disarmament.
83.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania reaffirms its unswerving opposition to the United States plan to establish what is called the multilateral nuclear force, which would provide West Germany with nuclear weapons and which constitutes a very serious threat to the security of Europe and to peace in general.
84.	The countless military bases of the United States on foreign soil and its warships equipped with nuclear weapons and operating on the seas and oceans constitute a permanent danger to international peace and security. We consider the liquidation of military bases abroad, including the abrogation of unfair treaties imposed on certain countries in order to transform their territories into military bases, to be a condition of overriding importance and immediate urgency for world peace and security. Consequently, the Albanian Government whole-heartedly supports the Governments which rightly demand the liquidation of United States military bases on their national territory and the abrogation of the unjust treaties relating to them.
85.	The emergence of the People's Republic of China as a nuclear Power has dealt a serious blow to the policy of monopoly and nuclear blackmail pursued by United States imperialism. We regard this development as a positive factor in the defence of the peoples and of peace, and we sincerely support the proposal by the Government of the People’s Republic of China that a conference of Heads of State of the entire world should be convened to discuss the question of banning and finally eliminating nuclear weapons.
86.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania considers that in the disarmament problem the time has come to move from closed and erratic negotiations to practical measures. Disarmament can only be achieved if a united front is established among all peace-loving States and peoples in order to expose and isolate the foes of disarmament and force them to accept it.
87.	The Albanian delegation fully agrees with the other delegations which have pointed out that one of the basic causes of the weakness of the United Nations is the absence of the People's Republic of China, a country of 700 million inhabitants, a founder Member of the Organization and a permanent member of the Security Council. Today there is no gainsaying that the struggle for the restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China concerns all Member States which are anxious to make the United Nations a true instrument for peace and international cooperation, in accordance with the Charter, and which are seriously interested in settling the great problems of our time.
88.	Nobody can claim that the United Nations is universal without China, or that China is represented in the Organization because its seat has been usurped by the Chiang Kai-shek clique. The attempts by the United States to pass off the island of Taiwan, which they have occupied by force, as China and to propagate the absurd theory of the "two Chinas" or of "one China and one Taiwan" so as to sever the island of Taiwan from China and perpetuate their occupation of the island, will never be successful. China is one and indivisible; it is the People's Republic of China; Taiwan is an integral part of China and its union with the mother country is a domestic affair of China. Only the Government of the People's Republic of China is competent to represent China and to assume and discharge obligations on China's behalf.
89.	Those who for fifteen years have tried in every possible way to keep China out of the United Nations and to isolate it have not done it any harm or hampered it in its march forward as a great socialist Power and in the steady expansion of its international relations. They 'have merely done serious harm to the United Nations and have found themselves isolated in their turn. The hopes of those who expected that natural calamities, blockades and aggressive imperialist acts would subjugate the great Chinese people were soon dashed. Not only has China not been brought to its knees but through self-denial it has surmounted all obstacles. It is having growing success in all fields and among its achievements the first nuclear explosion is evidence of the level of its economic, scientific and technical development. In announcing the nuclear explosion of 16 October 1964, the Chinese Government, faithful to its policy of peace, solemnly declared that at no time and in no circumstances would China be the first to use nuclear weapons.
90.	Those who are against the restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations are so short of arguments that at this session they are repeating the old anti-Chinese slanders about Tibet and the border dispute with India, which no longer deceive anybody.
91.	It is regrettable that the representative of India should have seen fit in this Assembly, in the absence of the parties concerned, to hurl unjust and groundless accusations against the People's Republic of China, whose peaceful policy has been acknowledged here in the last few days by several speakers, including the representatives of neighbouring countries such as Nepal, Cambodia and Indonesia.
92.	It is well established that in October 1962 it was not China, as the representative of India claimed, but India which "committed a massive and premeditated aggression" against China, that it is India which is still — this is public knowledge — making active preparation, with the aid of certain great Powers, for war against the People's Republic of China, it is India which continues to occupy part of Chinese territory and which is violating the national sovereignty of China with provocative intent.
93.	It is common knowledge that before and after the events of autumn 1962 the Chinese Government made untiring efforts to settle the border problem with India by peaceful means, ns it had done with its other neighbours, such as Burma, Nepal, Mongolia, Pakistan and Afghanistan, and that it was the Indian Government which refused; it is the Indian Government, too, and not the Chinese Government, which refuses to take the recommendations of the six- nation Colombo Conference as a basis for negotiation.
94.	We have felt it our duty to correct a distortion of the truth, without going into the details, which are not unfamiliar to the General Assembly. We wish to express our hope that in the end the Government of India will make a positive response to the goodwill of which the Government of the People's Republic of China has so often given proof and that together they will arrive at a negotiated settlement of their border problem, in the interests of those two great Asian countries themselves and of world peace.
95.	The People's Republic of Albania maintains relations of close friendship with the People's Republic of China. We know very well and intimately the new China and its marvellous people, who are advancing along the path of socialism, adding splendid new pages to their glorious history.
36. The peaceful policy of China is well known to many Members of the United Nations, whether or not they have relations with that country. It is known to all peoples. Its great achievements in socialist construction of the country, the tangible results of its just policy of good neighbourliness, the support it gives to peoples struggling for their national liberation, its international relations that are constantly expanding, its leading role in the formulation and application of the five principles of peaceful coexistence, its contribution to the maintenance of world peace, its efforts to bring about the peaceful settlement of international problems and differences and the restraint it has shown with regard to the ceaseless provocations and aggressive actions of the United States are the best evidence of its peaceful policy. Today, more than ever, it is obvious that without the participation of China, whose positive role as a great world Power is growing continually in the international arena, the United Nations cannot be effective and international problems cannot be solved.
97.	The representatives of several countries have persistently asked from this rostrum that the unprincipled obstructionism of the United States in the matter of the restoration of the lawful rights of China in the United Nations should be brought to an end and that our Organization should be allowed to profit from the contribution and undeniable experience of the People’s Republic of China in the solution of the great problems of peace and in the progress of human society.
98.	The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania hopes that at its present session the General Assembly will put an end to the distressing situation in which China’s seat in the United Nations is occupied by a person who represents no one and that by an overwhelming majority it will expel the followers of Chiang Kai-shek and invite the true representatives of the great Chinese people, the representatives of the Government of the People's Republic of China, to take their lawful place in the United Nations and in all its organs,
99.	Nineteen years have passed since the end of the Second World War, which caused so much suffering to the peoples of the world. The threat of a new world war remains, but in the meantime profoundly revolutionary events have occurred which have swung the balance of forces in favour of the forces of pef.ee and have aroused the courage and confidence of the peoples in their struggle for peace, national independence and social advancement.
100.	On 29 November 1964 the Albanian people, who were among the first victims of nazi-fascist aggression and who suffered extremely heavy losses in life and property during their struggle for national liberation, celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the people's liberation and revolution.
101.	In the history of our nation, the date 29 November 1944 marks the dividing line between two worlds, the world in which our nation was always trampled underfoot by the "powerful" and had no rights, and that in which it has raised itself to the position of all-powerful master of its own destiny.
102.	At the time of the liberation, Albania, after centuries of slavery and plunder was a backward country, covered with innumerable ruins and scars left by the fascist and nazi aggressors. The course followed by our people during these last twenty years has been fraught with obstacles and difficulties. The Albanian people have always faced enemies, difficulties and obstacles with their heads held high. That is how they received and defeated the fascist and nazi invaders and how they have for twenty years victoriously resisted the imperialists and their lackeys, their ceaseless provocation, their blackmail and their blockades. That is how they have escaped from the backwardness which was their legacy from the past and have achieved tremendous results in all fields, while at the same time successfully facing attacks from outside on the territorial integrity and national independence of their country.
103.	From being a backward agricultural country, Albania has now become an industrial agricultural country and is making continual progress. Poverty, unemployment, illiteracy, disease, those chronic ills of all under-developed countries, have been eliminated in Albania once and for all. I do not want to take up too much of the General Assembly's time but I should like to mention that at present industrial production in my country is about thirty-three times greater than it was in 1938, agricultural output has more than doubled and one out of every four inhabitants is going to school. Every year, at Tirana University, more than four times as many students with higher qualifications graduate as were produced in fifteen years under the old anti-people regime. Throughout Albania a wide network of health institutions has been established to provide free services for the whole population and the standard of living is incomparably higher than before the liberation. The national income is 5.3 times greater than in 1938. The expectation of life rose from thirty-eight years in 1938 to sixty-five years in 1960. In our country a new way of life has been born and is thriving under the sun of socialism.
104.	Albania is no longer, as it once was, a territory of concessions to be bartered about by the imperialist Powers, but an independent and sovereign socialist country, an active element and force for peace and progress in international affairs. The new Albania has entered upon the third decade of its existence and, under the tried direction of the Labour Party of Albania and its Government, it is advancing along the path of socialism towards peace and the certain prospect of a radiant future. Its example shows that the path of socialism is open even to small and backward countries such as Albania once was and that it is the path which leads to true independence and the building of a happy and prosperous life.
105.	The experience of the struggle for national liberation and the peaceful construction of Albania during the last twenty years has shown that even a small people, led by a staunch revolutionary party, can gain freedom and national independence against a powerful and superior enemy if it is determined to win, whatever the sacrifice; that once free it can defend and consolidate its conquests and build a happy and prosperous life, despite the attacks of the imperialists and their lackeys, if it is united and conscious of the cause it is defending, if it keeps power and economic resources in its own hands and if it relies in the first place on its own forces; that even a small country can become a factor for peace and progress if adheres firmly to a just policy based on solid principles.
106.	Our position is that relations between States, regardless of the fact that some are large and others small, must be based on the principles of equality, non-interference, respect for each other's national sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence between countries with different social systems. The fact that a country is small is neither a sin nor something to be ashamed of, just as the fact of being large does not give large countries the right to be arrogant towards small countries and trample on their rights.
107.	We are in favour of normal relations with our neighbours and other countries, but Albania has not accepted and never will accept inequality, the "Diktat" or imposed conditions in its relations with other countries. The Albanian people dearly love peace, but above everything they love freedom and their popular system of government and that is why they are devoting themselves with all their energy to building a happy life, while at the same time remaining vigilant.
108.	The People's Republic of Albania is making a sincere effort to ensure that among the countries in the region of the Balkans and the Adriatic, to which it belongs, there are good neighbourly relations of benefit to both sides, that imperialist aggression and the threat of a new world war are everywhere frustrated and that international peace and security are safeguarded and consolidated.
109.	Speaking on 28 November 1964, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the liberation. Comrade Enver Hoxha, First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Labour Party of Albania, said, among other things: "In the future, too, our Party and our Government will steadfastly follow a policy of peace, a policy of friendship and close fraternal co-operation on a Marxist-Leninist basis and a policy of the principles of proletarian internationalism with the peoples of the socialist countries, a policy of friendship and solidarity with the peoples who are fighting for their freedom and independence, in particular with our brother Arab peoples, with the peoples of black Africa, Asia and Latin America, and with all anti-imperialist forces. Our people defend their sovereignty, freedom and independence with resolution and vigour. They show the greatest respect for the sovereignty, freedom and independence of other peoples. On this basis, our Party and oar Government are always ready, as in the past, to strengthen their ties of friendship and co-operation with all other countries, including neighbouring countries."
110.	Adhering to this just policy, which has preserved its independence and inviolability, which has won it friends and sympathy among the peoples of the whole world, the People's Republic of Albania is making its contribution to the struggle against imperialism and colonialism, to the struggle to maintain peace and to free peoples from all oppression, exploitation and discrimination.
111.	The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania hopes that the General Assembly will soon find a way out of its present deadlock and that, through the decisions it is called upon to take on the important problems awaiting its consideration, it will strengthen the United Nations and do useful work for international peace and security, the maintenance of which, according to the Charter, is the primary purpose of the United Nations.