23.	Mr. President, may I offer to you my warmest congratulations on your election to the Presidency of the General Assembly. Your election was a tribute to your high qualities and a recognition of the increasingly important role of Africa in world affairs. May I also express our high regard to your predecessor, Mr. Sosa Rodriguez, who guided the Assembly's work last year with great distinction.
24.	I should like to reaffirm, at the outset, my country's deep faith in the United Nations and its Charter. We shall continue to support the Organization in its efforts for the preservation of peace, the liberation of peoples, and the promotion of human welfare and progress.
25.	The membership of the United Nations continues to grow as a result of the successes achieved by national liberation movements the world over. Many countries and peoples who for centuries have remained outside the mainstream of international affairs are today participating actively in the pursuit of the great objectives of our Charter. I take this opportunity to welcome the three new Members — Malawi, Malta and Zambia. Our membership in the Committee of Twenty-Four has given us the opportunity of following closely; and with admiration, the struggle of these three countries for freedom and independence.
26.	In spite of the rapid increase in membership, the ultimate objective of universality still eludes us. The representation of China in the Organization is a matter of the highest importance, and we shall support any initiative that aims at fully restoring the legitimate rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations.
27.	Now that the Organization has entered its twentieth year, we feel that the time has come to reappraise its work and effectiveness.
28.	A step in the right direction has already been taken with amendments to enlarge the membership of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council [General Assembly resolution 1991 (XVIII)]. We add our voice to many others in expressing the hope that all countries will ratify these amendments so that the work of these two important organs shall truly reflect the realities of our world today.
29.	One of the most significant international developments during the current year has been the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held at Geneva. The General Assembly is called upon to consider the important recommendations and conclusions of the Conference. We hope, in particular, that the new institutions proposed by the Conference will be established without delay in view of the important tasks entrusted to them and the great hopes and expectations which the developing countries attach to them.
30.	The urgency of the problem of development cannot be over-emphasized. The achievements of the trade conference, significant as they are, still fall short of the requirements of the developing countries. If the gap separating these countries from the advanced nations is to be narrowed, then greater and more determined efforts must be made to solve the urgent needs of the overwhelming majority of humanity. While recognizing the responsibility of each and every developing country in this regard, we must underline the important contributions that the advanced countries are called upon to make in the world-wide campaign against poverty, disease and ignorance.
31.	The problem of disarmament remains one of the most difficult problems facing the world. The Eighteen- Nation Committee on Disarmament has not made any appreciable progress since last year. Today the situation is as dangerous and potentially explosive as ever. The threat of the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons is becoming more serious, and, unless urgent and effective measures are taken to halt the further spread of these weapons, then the world may forfeit its last chance to save itself from the holocaust of thermo-nuclear war.
32.	We support the efforts of the eight neutral countries in the Geneva talks, and we hope the General Assembly will endorse the proposal for the convening of a world conference on disarmament to which all countries will be invited. The recent Conference of Non-Aligned Countries in Cairo endorsed the convening of such a conference, which we believe will contribute greatly to settling many of the outstanding issues which still stand in the way of general and complete disarmament.
33.	Since our national revolution of 14 July 1958, Iraq has been pursuing a policy of non-alignment. This policy, which we share with many other countries, has proved to be an important factor in the preservation of world peace and the lessening of international tensions. The soundness of the policy of non-alignment was clearly demonstrated when, barely three years after the first Conference of Non-Aligned Countries in Belgrade, a second conference was held in Cairo, in which nearly half of the independent States of the world participated.
34.	The policy of non-alignment does not mean standing aloof from what happens elsewhere in the world. It endeavours to promote co-operation and understanding based on justice and peace among all countries of the world, irrespective of their political and social systems. In this regard I should like to express our satisfaction that the United Nations is continuing its efforts to codify the legal principles governing friendly relations and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter. We shall spare no effort to help in this important endeavour, because such codification of principles is necessary for the stabilization of international relations.
35.	Among all the problems facing this Organization, none is more pressing than that of colonialism. It is an affront to the dignity of man that, nearly twenty years after the establishment of this Organization and four years since the adoption of the historic Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)], there are still many territories and millions of people under the colonial yoke. Imperialism is using various forms of force, terror and intimidation to maintain colonial positions in a world that has resolutely decided to rid itself of this evil. The national liberation movements are gaining in momentum and fighting with growing confidence everywhere. The United Nations, acting through its Special Committee of Twenty-Four on decolonization, has contributed significantly to this process of emancipation.
36.	In some parts of the Arab world and Africa, colonialism is making a futile attempt to maintain itself by force and terror. In Angola, Mozambique, Southern Rhodesia, Palestine, Oman, Aden and the southern part of the Arabian Peninsula, the people are looking towards the United Nations for help in their struggle for independence. Iraq, which has recognized the Provisional Government of Angola, is ready to co-operate in any steps which the United Nations may wish to take to help the valiant struggle of the Angolan people.
37.	Similarly, the international community is called upon to give its support to the people of Mozambique in their heroic struggle for freedom. The United Nations must also do everything in its power to prevent the creation in Southern Rhodesia of another bastion of apartheid on the African continent, and ensure that the people of that country attain their legitimate rights to liberty and equality.
38.	This brings me to the problem of apartheid in South Africa, whose Government has for many years defied the will of the United Nations, and violated the principles of the United Nations Charter. My country will support any, collective action designed to secure the implementation of the resolutions on apartheid with a view to the total eradication of this policy and its evil consequences,
39.	When Belgian troops were landed in the Congo last month, my Government deplored the foreign military intervention in the internal affairs of that country. The problem is now before the Security Council and we whole-heartedly support the demand of the African States that steps should be taken to ensure that such violations of the Charter will not occur in the future.
40.	The Zionist invasion and occupation of Palestine represents the worst example of colonialism the world has ever seen. This is not merely a situation where foreign rule has been imposed by force; the victims have not only lost their freedom, but their crountry as well. Their tragedy has no parallel in modern times. Their expulsion from their homeland was the result of the collaboration of colonialism with Zionism, one of the most reactionary, racist and aggressive movements ever to disgrace mankind. It would be idle to expect that the passage of time will in any way diminish the determination of the people of Palestine to regain their rights and recover their lost homeland.
41.	The people of Palestine are now co-ordinating their activities in a new liberation organization. It is an important step towards the restoration of their homeland, which was usurped from them in violation of the most elementary principles of justice, and in total disregard of the right of self-determination. Israel has been and still is an imperialist base and a perpetual source of aggression in the region. Only last month Israeli planes committed an act of blatant aggression against Syria. I would like to reaffirm the complete solidarity of the people and Government of Iraq with Syria and our readiness to give every support and assistance to our sister Arab country, if it should ever again be the victim of Israeli aggression. The Middle East will never know peace until the rights of the Arab people of Palestine are fully restored. This was fully recognized by the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries recently held in Cairo. Its Declaration, which is before us as an official document of this session, states the following: "The Conference condemns the imperialistic policy pursued in the Middle East and, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, decides to: "(1) Endorse the full restoration of all the rights of the Arab people of Palestine to their homeland, and their inalienable right to self-determination; "(2) Declare their full support to the Arab people of Palestine in their struggle for liberation from colonialism and racism." [A/&763, sect. I.]
42.	The question of Aden and the protectorates has been before the United Nations for nearly two years. The world is witnessing there a great struggle for freedom.
43.	In its resolution 1949 (XVIII), adopted a year ago, the General Assembly recognized the right of the people of the territory to freedom from colonial rule, and recommended a number of measures to enable them to exercise freely their right of self-determination. It also recommended that the British military base in Aden be liquidated, since its maintenance is prejudicial to the peace and security of the region. The British Government paid no heed to this and other resolutions, and did not co-operate with the Special Committee of Twenty-Four, refusing, for the second time, to allow a Sub-Committee on Aden to visit the territory. The Special Committee fully endorsed the conclusions and recommendations of the Sub-Committee and called, once again, on the British Government to implement resolution 1949 (XVIII) and to give its full co-operation to the Special Committee and its Sub-Committee.
44.	It is our hope that the new British Government will review the situation, and co-operate with the United Nations in achieving, without delay, the objectives of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples. I would like here to recall that the distinguished British historian, Arnold Toynbee, said, shortly before the recent elections in Britain, that the next Government of his country ought to arrange to’ give the people of South Arabia an independence that will be genuine, and he went on to say: "On our own initiative, we should propose that there should be a United Nations inquiry into the real wishes of the South Arabian peoples. It is certain that we shall soon have to evacuate Arabia anyway. Since we have to go, it will be much better for us to go quietly and, above all, to go quickly."
45.	In Oman, British imperialism is still reluctant to give up its influence and privileged position, and for the last nine years the people of Oman have been fighting heroically to attain their freedom.
46.	The question of Oman is in essence a colonial problem and should be treated as such, since there can be no doubt that the United Kingdom exercises great power and influence in the country, in order to protect its economic and other interests in the area.
47.	Finally, may I express the hope that everything should be done to enable the nineteenth session to proceed with its work normally, so that the important items on its agenda will be dealt with in an orderly manner, in accordance with established practices and procedures.