100.	Mr. President, in taking the floor, may I first of all offer you, on behalf of the Italian Government and myself, sincere congratulations on your election to the high office of President of this Assembly. We in Rome are very happy at your election, not only because this important gathering is to be guided by a person of authority and competence such as yourself, with wide experience in the field of international organizations, but also because your accession to the Presidency reflects the emergence of the African countries and confirms their active participation in the life of our Organization.
101.	I should also like to renew the congratulations already extended by our Permanent Representative on the admission to membership of the United Nations of two new African States, Malawi and Zambia, two countries with which we have already established mutually advantageous relations and whose contribution to society has been particularly significant and useful.
102.	Italy regards the African countries with great friendship and is fully determined to participate in a common effort towards progress and peace through fruitful co-operation based on full, mutual respect for national sovereignty and character.
103.	In this spirit, one of the African achievements which we regard with the greatest interest is the strengthening of the ties of co-operation among States throughout the whole continent of Africa, which led, in May 1963, to the creation of the Organization of African Unity. As our Prime Minister, Mr. Aldo Moro, said when he addressed the African Ambassadors accredited to Italy, on the occasion of the first anniversary of that Organization's establishment, we consider the O. A. U. a contributing factor towards stability and progress, and believe that its activities will steadily promote peace and stability in Africa.
104.	I should like, on this occasion, to address a special word of welcome to Malta. I had the good fortune to be present in person on the occasion of Malta's accession to independence, and we Italians are particularly happy to see that country admitted to the great family of the United Nations.
105.	At this critical moment in the life of the United Nations, the infusion of new blood, which the admission of these three new Members represents, gives us cause for great confidence in the future of our Organization and in the triumph of its spirit and ideals. Those ideals are set out in the Charter on which the United Nations is based, and, what is more important, they have been dictated by the collective conscience of the peoples. That conscience, which is a sign of man's progress throughout the long and uneven course of history, warns us that, today, peoples in general do not consider the old political systems adequate. They feel that peace is essential in a world which is becoming even more closely united, and that such a peace must be guaranteed by an international organization acting as guardian of the highest principles of justice, and as a forum where anyone may state his views and ensure that these views and the demands and aspirations of others are brought into agreement in one "great harmony" of nations.
106.	The essential aim that we are pursuing by our efforts is, of course, the strengthening of peace based on justice and security. In order to approach our common goal, it seems to us that there are four important requirements: (a) the achievement of further co-operation among nations at all levels and in every field of activity; (b) the strengthening of international organizations, especially the United Nations, by affirming their authority and providing them with the means necessary to ensure their efficient functioning; (c) the reduction of the risk of war and, consequently, a search for any formula, even an imperfect one, which may help towards the gradual achievement of effective and controlled disarmament, worked out on a balanced and realistic basis; (d) the just fulfilment of the aspirations of the peoples of the developing third world, which is an essential factor in a lasting peace.
107.	Since peace is the supreme goal, we confidently welcome any effort designed to improve the international atmosphere and to make possible the necessary communication, co-operation and friendship among peoples.
108.	In an address to the Italian Parliament, when he assumed office as Head of State on 29 December 1964, the President of the Italian Republic, Giuseppe Saragat, said that the preservation of peace was the first task of legislators, members of Governments and Heads of State, and that in pursuing this task they must strive, with patience and perseverance, to create conditions — such as progressive, simultaneous and controlled disarmament — that will make peace inviolable. He made it clear that the road to disarmament was the road of international "détente" and negotiations among Governments representing different political, economic and social systems—in short, the road of understanding and tolerance.
109.	In that spirit we welcomed the official statements made by the leaders of the two principal great Powers, who quite recently reaffirmed their intention of continuing to pursue a policy of "détente".
110.	We, for our part, shall continue to make every effort to consolidate and broaden the basis for that policy. In fact, whenever a suitable opportunity has presented itself, we have sought to offer a considered suggestion to ensure that the positive elements contained in any diplomatic initiative, from wherever it has come, should not be lost.
111.	We feel, for example, that the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes should be made generally applicable and extended to all types of disputes, not only territorial ones, and that it should cover all cases of aggression, both direct and indirect. Moreover, that principle cannot be dissociated from the task of strengthening the international norms and machinery designed to ensure respect for it, by providing for recourse to organizations for regional security and, at the highest level, to the United Nations.
112.	Indeed, in viewing the current aspects of the international situation, we see how essential it is for considerations of balance and security to be applied to our difficult progress towards the desired goals of general and controlled disarmament and the diversion to peaceful and productive uses of the vast sums which are now being spent on armaments. But in the meantime the process of strengthening the authority of the United Nations and its capacity for intervention and mediation must, from now on, be synchronized and gradually intensified as we move towards disarmament.
113.	It can safely be said that the best guarantee of peace lies in strengthening the United Nations. For within the United Nations, there is hope and a future for an organized international society and for the harmony among nations that we all wish to achieve. Outside the United Nations there can be only a reversion to power politics and the use of force. Within the United Nations there is the promise of co-operation in utilizing the resources and energies of all peoples for constructive ends.
114.	Italy will continue ever more actively to support the authority of the United Nations, as the forum in which all problems pertaining to relations among States can find a solution based on justice and law.
115.	This commitment reflects the profound aspiration of the Italian people for peace, civic progress and, hence, for mutual understanding with other nations. Indeed, this aspiration is inherent in the spirit of our nation, which has its roots in the inspiration given to the world by Christian values, and which has grown steadily stronger as a result of the grievous sufferings and tribulations we have lived through during the past fifty years.
116.	The United Nations has to its credit a long list of successes in its efforts to preserve peace in circumstances that could have had unforeseeable consequences, and to meet the needs of different nations in the economic and social sphere. We should not be surprised or discouraged by the fact that it falls short of perfection, because imperfection is in the nature of all things human. Instead of blaming it, let us do our best to give it the means of fulfilling its difficult tasks, so that it can intervene, wherever it is needed, to maintain peace.
117.	There are problems of economic development and international trade, of disarmament and peace keeping, which await solution. If the ideal solution cannot be found immediately, at least progress towards it can be made by further and more detailed consideration in the Assembly. But the Italian Government is obliged to note, with deep concern, that the action which the world expects from the United Nations in such areas is greatly jeopardized by the crisis which is now overshadowing the entire Organization. We have a serious financial crisis which threatens to break out into a political crisis, the consequences of which could be still more serious.
118. There is no need for me to dwell at any length on the discussion of the validity of Article 19 of the United Nations Charter. Our concern centres neither on the legal nor on the moral aspects of the question. We have no doubts as to the validity of the existing provisions of the United Nations Charter.
119.	From the manner in which the question has been broached, it seems clear that, basically, we are confronted with the following choice: either $150 million or the end of the United Nations. It is easy to see that this choice is unacceptable and that there can be no comparison between the two possibilities when it comes to relative importance. That gives us reason to hope that the dilemma will be solved realistically, in view of the fact that it is in the interests of all of us to strengthen the United Nations. It is hard for me — and not for me alone — to see why such an anomalous situation should be prolonged unnecessarily.
120.	It is my firm belief that the only way out is for us to put our cards on the table. By this I mean that the Secretary-General should be in a position to assure the Assembly that the United Nations is once more financially solvent, so that he can count on a prompt settlement of the Organization's outstanding financial commitments.
121.	Furthermore, the Italian delegation sees no reason why — now that they have established positions of principle — those Members that do not share the opinion voiced by the majority cannot make a contribution that would permit a practical solution to the Organization's financial problems and enable the work of the General Assembly to proceed in a normal manner.
122.	Precisely because we are determined to give our Organization every support, so that it can fulfil the noble ideals on which it is based and the hopes, which are placed in it by all the peoples of the world, we feel it our duty to study its present situation quite objectively and to see what improvements, if any, need to be made in its structure and method of functioning.
123.	The Charter drawn up at San Francisco twenty years ago is remarkable for its progressive spirit and the high ideals which have given it form, as well as for its solid juridical foundations. But it was drafted at a different stage in the development of the international community and therefore cannot be considered immutable, particularly since the document itself makes provision for possible amendments. Just as we favoured the enlargement of the Security Council and of the Economic and Social Council — and I am pleased to inform the Assembly that my Government has agreed to submit the appropriate instruments to Parliament for ratification — we feel that we should not be hesitant about considering or encouraging serious suggestions for better adapting the procedures and structure of the United Nations to the needs of the times and the opinions prevailing among its Members. The ultimate goal will remain unaltered and unalterable — peace among nations, with justice and economic and social progress. The means of pursuing it may vary.
124.	While we fully see the difficulties in which our Organization now finds itself, for various but related reasons, and which we trust will be remedied, we are also aware of what is happening in the world outside the direct sphere of action of the United Nations. We are closely watching certain situations and events, although they are occurring in regions remote from our own, and evaluating their underlying and immediate causes, as well as their possible effects, which give all peace-loving peoples cause for serious concern.
125.	The internal situation in the Congo and the dramatic events which followed have been for us a cause of great anxiety both on moral and human grounds. There is still cause for anxiety as far as concerns the maintenance of peace in that area. We fervently hope that the Congolese will lay down their arms and agree to effect a national reconciliation on the political level, with the help of the Organization of African Unity.
126.	The question of Cyprus is much closer to us geographically and is therefore of great concern to Italy as a Mediterranean country. While it is universally recognized that international treaties should be respected and that any amendments to them should be based on agreement among the parties concerned, we very much hope that, also through the mediation of the United Nations, a solution will be found which will be acceptable to all parties.
127.	We have always had, and still have, confidence in the method of negotiation, which is the only way to achieve just and peaceful solutions. Taking this as our premise, we are convinced that far-reaching and well-intentioned negotiations can lead to a solution even of the German question. Italy fervently hopes that a further relaxation of international tension may create the right atmosphere for positive discussions on this subject and that a natural and democratic solution may be found, which, being a solution based on justice, would be an important contribution to the cause of peace.
128.	I now turn to the question of disarmament, a subject which involves many matters of vital importance for all the peoples of the world.
129.	In keeping with the policy which led us, in 1961, to vote in favour of the Irish resolution calling upon all States to agree neither to make nuclear weapons available to others nor to produce them for themselves [resolution 1665 (XVI)], we maintain that it is essential that, in the spirit of such a resolution, a general agreement should be reached as quickly as possible on the non-dissemination of nuclear weapons.
130.	We have constantly maintained, and still maintain, that a ban on all nuclear tests, including underground tests, is essential. This would have the twofold purpose of preventing the further development of nuclear weapons, which are already frightening enough, and also the further proliferation of such weapons on a national basis.
131.	The nuclear test carried out in Sinkiang on 15 October last gave proof, if that was necessary, of the urgent need for us to direct our common efforts towards two ends: to work out a system of collective security which would remove any incentive to procure independent nuclear devices, and to negotiate a treaty prohibiting the dissemination of atomic weapons.
132.	We are open to any useful and constructive suggestion and trust that efforts towards these two ends will be crowned with success. If, in order to achieve agreement on the cessation of tests and to be certain that the ban will be universally observed, a minimum of controls must be imposed, why should anyone object? And why should anyone not agree to an exchange of scientific information among the Powers mainly concerned? We hope that a positive reply to these questions will pave the way for the extension of the treaty imposing a partial ban on nuclear tests, which has already had a beneficial influence on international relations.
133.	We are in favour of the establishment of denuclearized zones, provided that this is agreed upon by all the countries concerned and that it does not change the existing balance of power on which the maintenance of peace depends today.
134.	We also hope that effective progress will be made with regard to the gradual reduction and eventual elimination of inter-continental ballistic missiles. Such progress will be possible only if all concerned abandon their attempts to hide, behind the more superficial aspects of the proposed reduction of such weapons, a fundamental change in the balance of conventional military forces, All the parties principally concerned should stop trying to gain advantage from measures which, both for logical reasons and in accordance with the "agreed principles" of September 1961, are intended to apportion the positive and negative effects equally among all parties during the period of transition to complete disarmament.
135.	We should like to conclude this part of our statement by reaffirming the hope that the Geneva Conference on Disarmament will soon resume work and that everything possible will be done to continue and develop those discussions, which, as a result of the serious spirit in which they have been conducted, have already rendered valuable service to the cause of peace and the relaxation of tension. We are convinced that the transfer of the negotiations to a larger body would not make an already difficult task any easier, and the best form for progress on disarmament remains the Geneva Conference, which has acquired a wealth of knowledge, experience and background.
136.	We attach great importance to the problems posed by the countries of the Third World, or by those countries which are in process of developing politically, economically and psychologically. Those countries, in fact, while seeking to speed up their rate of domestic progress and development, wish to assert their own character and dignity as States before the outside world by playing an effective and vital part in the relations which govern the evolution of the world situation.
137.	We, therefore, consider it a positive factor that the countries of the Third World should strengthen their own individuality by promoting the development of sound political and social structures in keeping with their own national character and traditions as well as with their present needs. Hence we strongly support the principle of full mutual respect and noninterference in internal affairs which has been re affirmed many times in this hall. For this reason, also, we consider that among the many ways of providing the assistance needed by certain countries in the economic, technical or social fields, the United Nations is of particular importance. It is, above all, a moral obligation to achieve a more equitable distribution of wealth through the constructive development of the economies of the emerging countries. But it also represents a sound political guaranty of peace. Financial and technical co-operation with such countries should lead to their using the help made available to them to raise the standard of living of their people.
138.	At the end of last year resolution 1995 (XIX) was adopted in this hall, formally setting up the new apparatus for the United Nations Conference on Trade and Developement. By this resolution, the United Nations planned to adapt the means at its disposal to the achievement of a better approach to the problems of trade and development.
139.	The Italian delegation is happy that this resolution was adopted for two reasons.
140.	First, we are happy because the United Nations, at a time when it is almost paralysed by the crisis which is afflicting it, has succeeded by a common effort in unanimously approving a significant decision which will have considerable influence in a vitally important sector and which sets out for the United Nations a programme of work for the years to come. This is a clear sign that, In spite of everything, each one of us here in this hall, as well as those who have forsaken our company — we hope only for a short time — can, when necessary, turn our minds to essential matters and preserve unaltered our faith in the future of our Organization.
141.	In my opinion, the essential feature of the resolution is that it recognizes the importance and urgency of finding a solution to the problems of trade in order to promote economic development.
142.	We are also pleased because the adoption of the resolution shows that the compelling force of certain truths, which have to do with the lives of all nations and all mankind, can transcend and overcome even the most profound differences. Foremost among the problems that cannot be subject to any conditions, but actually have a conditioning effect of their own — I refer to such problems as security, peace and disarmament — are those problems which relate to the development of the economically backward countries. Economic development means raising living standards, improving education and environmental conditions, protecting the fundamental rights of the individual, achieving social balance and international understanding and co-operation.
143.	Problems which have such moral implications ultimately end by influencing external conditions. We are most pleased to see that the present year of 1965, which is dedicated to international co-operation, has started out — in continuation of the good work begun in 1964 and thanks to the approval of the UNCTAD resolution — as a year for new efforts and new means of combating economic backwardness in the developing countries. Italy has made an active contribution towards the achievement of this goal and will continue to do so in the future.
144.	We have no ulterior motive in our dealings with the countries of the Third World. We want only to help them in their peaceful efforts to achieve political, economic and social progress. This is the sole aim of the many Italians who go to these countries. They function and serve, wherever they are needed, under the banner of the United Nations or as experts employed by public or private enterprises, to promote better living conditions. We shall continue to make this contribution, either through bilateral channels or through existing international organizations. Our delegation therefore hopes that the flow of technicians of all nationalities and of aid from all countries will increase, so that all may play a part in this immense task of accelerating the economic and social development of over two thirds of the world's population.
145.	Before concluding my statement, I should like to mention the keen interest that the Italian Government is taking in international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space and the progress that has been made in that field within the framework of United Nations resolutions. We are glad to have actively helped in bringing about such important technical and social developments as the two agreements instituting a global system of telecommunications by means of artificial satellites. This is the first concrete use that has been made of outer space and, by intensifying ties among peoples, it should prove to be an important instrument for peace.
146.	Italy also took part in the work of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Legal Sub-Committee, in developing a body of law for outer space. In so doing, it fully realized the importance of the results that would be achieved. Indeed, considerable progress has been made in two areas, namely: liability for damages caused by space launching and assistance to astronauts. Another significant development in the field of outer space, involving both the United Nations and Italy, has been the San Marco project for space research — an important project sponsored by the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. With the help of the United States and Kenya, an Italian satellite will be put into orbit around the equator to explore certain characteristics of the atmosphere and ionosphere.
147.	Lastly, I should like to mention our participation in various United Nations activities during the past year. We had the pleasure of being hosts in Rome to the Seminar on Freedom of Information from 7 to 20 April 1964, and to the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme from 20 to 30 October. We also played an active part in the work of the Committee of Twenty-Four on decolonization, and the Committee of Twenty-One on financing, the Commission on Human Rights and its Sub- Commission, the Technical Assistance Committee, the Governing Council of the Special Fund and the Housing Committee, to all of whose work we endeavoured to make an objective and constructive contribution.
148.	On the subject of decolonization, may I be allowed, as the representative of a country that has participated and is still actively participating in the most historic movement of this age, to point out how much the United Nations has accomplished in hastening this process, which has been taking place for many years all over the world. It has done this by studying the problems involved, suggesting solutions for them, and mobilizing world opinion at a time when progress towards full independence seemed to be slower than we might have hoped.
149.	I hope that in frankly stating Italy's point of views, without indulging in facile optimism, I may have made some contribution to the work of our Organization and to the common task which confronts us, and which the peoples of the world expect us to accomplish.
150.	The annual Assembly of the United Nations provides us all with an opportunity for responsible meditation on the importance of living up to popular expectations and of offering substantial progress towards peace, improved living conditions and the fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of all peoples.
151.	Italy will be second to none in its efforts to help in the attainment of these lofty goals.