1. My delegation wishes to bring to you all warm greetings and best wishes from my President, Mzee Jomo Kenyatta. On behalf of the President, the people and the delegation of Kenya, permit me to express to you, Mr. President, our sincere congratulations on your election as President of this great and august body. Your appointment is a singular honour to Africa and is a reflection of the great part that Africa is playing and is destined to play in international affairs. Our felicitations go out to you on your brilliant and eloquent speech, which not only projected the image of Africa but also symbolized the important contribution which Africa is making to international affairs. As you rightly said, Mr. President, Africa — which for so many centuries has been exploited by so many Powers — must now rise fully to contribute to the progress of mankind.
2.	At the time of its admission to membership of the United Nations, during the eighteenth session of the General Assembly, Kenya pledged itself to abide by and to promote the basic purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. Today, we reaffirm our faith in those principles and purposes, which are promotion of international peace and security, respect for the dignity and worth of the human person, belief in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, the promotion of social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, and the elimination of colonialism and imperialism throughout the world.
3.	Kenya believes that peace, justice, freedom and security form the foundation upon which the living standards of all the peoples of the world can be developed and raised. The developing countries, no less that the developed ones, require peace and security for their political, economic and social development.
4.	Regarding Kenya’s domestic situation, I would like to recall that my President, Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, in our last year's election manifesto stated:"The Government of Kenya would be African because our nation must grow organically from what is indigenous. While adopting that which is suitable from other cultures, from the East and from the West, we must give our people pride and self- respect, building upon all that is good and valid in our traditional society."
5.	In drawing up our Constitution, we had uppermost in our minds the development of a framework of government which is most suited to the genius of our people and to the need for an efficient administration. We have in our Constitution a provision for the protection of fundamental rights and liberties which guarantees to the citizens all the liberties and rights that are specified in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
6.	The theory of multiple political parties held in the West, and other parts of the world, is not necessarily applicable to Kenya. Our Constitution gives the people the right to organize political parties in opposition to the Government if they so wish. In fact, after our last election, three political parties emerged in the country. But, realizing that there was no fundamental difference of policy between the parties, both the opposition parties voluntarily dissolved themselves and now support the Government. I would like particularly to emphasize that this evolution was completely voluntary: there was no legislation, no force, no inducement of any kind whatsoever to bring it about. Let me add that there is not a single political prisoner in Kenya today. This political evolution is a development unique in modern history.
7.	Kenya's foreign policy is based on the principle of positive non-alignment. In pursuance of this policy, we reserve our right to take our own independent stand on the many international issues which face the world today, irrespective of the attitude of the other Powers, whether Eastern or Western. We refuse to be drawn into Cold War manoeuvres. Power blocs, military alliances and similar institutional systems intended to serve the interests of the Cold War.
8.	We believe in respect for the territorial integrity and political independence of countries, large and small, non-interference in the affairs of other States in accordance with the well-established rules of international law, friendly relations and co-operation among States both for the peaceful resolution of international disputes and for the maintenance of international peace and security unswerving support for the granting of independence to territories still languishing under colonial rule, the promotion of human rights and equality throughout the world, and the furtherance of social progress, technical assistance, and economic development. We are convinced that the United Nations offers the best possible opportunity for the implementation of these principles on which our foreign policy is based.
9.	In May 1963, at Addis Ababa in Ethiopia, history was made when the heads of more than thirty independent African States formed the Organization of African Unity. This organization strives to foster friendship and co-operation among its members in political, economic, social and cultural matters. We believe that freedom for any country in Africa cannot be complete until the entire continent is free and united. The unity of the African States would strengthen the United Nations, and we appeal to the Members of this world Organization to support the Organization of African Unity in its endeavour to promote freedom and democracy in Africa. African unity is vital for the maintenance of peace and security in the world. The Charter of the Organization of African Unity and that of the United Nations are complementary to each other and inspired by the same sentiments. Kenya, as a champion of African freedom and unity, is a member and staunch supporter of the Organization of African Unity.
10.	 As all of you are aware, the most serious problem facing the Organization of African Unity is the Congo crisis. That unhappy country has become inextricably bound up with imperialism and neo-colonialism, and all the sordid intrigues that go with it, tendering it politically ineffective, economically weak despite its vast mineral resources, and geographically dismembered. In certain parts of the country there is a complete breakdown of established law and order and a total absence of peace and security. This Congo tragedy is the result of naked, unwarranted foreign intervention, which continues unabated up to this day.
11.	 Since its inception, the Organization of African Unity has directed all its efforts towards finding a peaceful solution to the Congo problem, which we believe is essentially political rather than military. To this end, an ad hoc conciliation commission was appointed in Addis Ababa by the Organization of African Unity last September, with the mandate of finding ways and means to effect national reconciliation within the Congo and the normalization of relations between Congo (Leopoldville) and its neighbours. Kenya was honoured by the appointment of my President, Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, as the Chairman of this commission.
12.	 My President immediately issued an appeal for the cessation of hostilities and convened a meeting of the commission in Nairobi. After protracted negotiations and thorough deliberations, the commission decided that all white mercenaries and foreign troops should be withdrawn forthwith from the Congo, and that all foreign intervention should cease immediately. I was a member of the delegation entrusted with the duty of explaining to the United States Government the decision of the commission. This was done.
13.	 In the meantime, my President was in constant touch with the Leopoldville and Stanleyville authorities, desperately trying to implement the decision of the ad hoc commission through the use of negotiations and good offices. But his task was made impossible by the intensified military intervention of the United States and Belgium, with the actual connivance of the United Kingdom Government, which provided facilities for mounting the military intervention.
14.	 This intervention, solicited under heavy pressure, in circumstances amounting to breach of faith and in callous disregard of the efforts of the Organization of African Unity ad hoc commission, unfolded yet another chapter in the tragedy of the Congo, resulting in the loss of thousands of innocent lives, including those of some of the hostages.
15.	 The hostages would probably be alive today had it not been for the United States-Belgium military intervention. The ad hoc commission was not allowed to complete the negotiations with the Stanleyville authorities for the release of the hostages, which were being conducted in Nairobi. It almost seemed that the United States was not as much concerned with the lives of the hostages as with the fall of Stanleyville, which became a top military priority in its intervention. This is all the more emphasized by the fact that the United States was warned that its planned military objectives would jeopardize the chances of success of the talks and also place the lives of the hostages in grave danger. This warning went unheeded, negotiations were broken off in Nairobi by the United States Ambassador on instructions from Washington, and the military operation was organized. The gruesome results of this so-called humanitarian intervention are too well known to be recounted here.
16.	 We believe that another Congo anywhere in Africa would be disastrous to the stability and development of Africa and would endanger international peace and security. I appeal to all the Members of this Assembly to support the efforts of the Organization of African Unity in the restoration of peace, law and order in the Congo. A solution can be found in the African context provided that the Organization of African Unity is given full opportunity to solve this problem and the interventionists renounce their dreams of neocolonialist control of the area and work to serve world peace and not their selfish interests or the Cold War. Let it be understood, here and now, that an imagined or real danger to certain minority groups in a particular country in Africa does not confer on any foreign Power the right of military intervention in that country.
17.	 My country regards the Congo problem as so vital that it has co-operated with other independent African States in calling for a meeting of the Security Council to discuss this problem. We propose to set out the facts in greater detail here.
18.	 Permit me to remind this Assembly of the resolution passed at the Second Conference of the Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned. Countries, held in Cairo in October 1964, which appealed urgently: "... to all foreign Powers at present interfering in the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly those engaged in military intervention in that country, to cease such interference, which infringes the interests and sovereignty of the Congolese people and constitutes a threat to neighbouring countries." [A/5763, sect. I.]
19.	 We have moved a long way from the San Francisco Conference of 1945, when only two independent African countries were among the original signatories to the United Nations Charter. The road to independence has been long, fraught with difficulties, opposition, prejudices and impediments of various descriptions and forms. But today, happily enough, we are proud to see that the number of independent African countries in this Organization has risen to thirty-five. It is evidence of the fact that the enormous sacrifices made by freedom fighters throughout Africa, motivated only by love of freedom and the dignity of man, have not been in vain.
20.	 Here, I would like to express our heartfelt congratulations to the new sister African States of Malawi and Zambia on their achievement of statehood and admission to the United Nations. I would also like to congratulate the State of Malta on its attainment of independence. We wish them peace, progress and prosperity; we are confident that, under the able guidance of their well-known leaders, they will make their impact on international relations for the betterment of humanity.
21.	 Let me strike a note of restraint by saying that the time for total rejoicing for Africa will come only when all the African territories now under colonial subjugation are finally liberated. There are still millions of our African brothers in South Africa, Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique, French Somaliland and the Spanish colonies who are living under the worst forms of human oppression. They are denied the right of self-determination; the regimes imposed upon them by brute force have stamped out their fundamental rights and freedoms, contrary to the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the various other international instruments intended to promote human rights throughout the world. Our African brethren are condemned to live under fascist tyranny, where their legitimate aspirations to live in freedom are stifled by racist minorities. This situation will not, and cannot, be tolerated any longer. The United Nations has condemned it; the conscience of the world has moved vigorously against it.
22.	 Ever since the United Nations was first set up as an institution for world peace' and security and for the attainment of human rights throughout the world. South Africa and Portugal have repeatedly flouted the resolutions of the United Nations and its various bodies; they have hampered the work of the various committees formed to ameliorate the conditions of oppressed peoples; they have not learned that the evil philosophy of apartheid based on racial superiority can never have any meaning in this twentieth century. So far the United Nations has confined itself to passing resolutions. The time for positive action has now come. The prophets and advocates of the Nazi tyranny, also based on racial superiority, have come and gone; so will the prophets and advocates of apartheid.
23.	 So long as the subjugated African peoples are denied the right of self-determination, relations between African States, on the one hand, and the colonial Powers and their collaborators on the other, will always be strained; so long as our African brethren are denied freedom, justice and human dignity, world peace, stability and international understanding will be jeopardized.
24.	I would like to put it on record that Africa will no longer tolerate, or permit the existence of, colonialism and neo-colonialism, no matter in what form it is disguised or from what source it emanates: whether it assumes the form of political subversion, military intervention, the threat of force, the corruption of leaders, the creation by outside Powers of puppets to disrupt established authority, or economic pressures.
25.	My delegation reiterates its stand in supporting the representation of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations. China is a vast country, with a population of over 700 million people, with a Government in full and effective control of the territory and recognized diplomatically by Kenya, other African States, and almost all the major Powers of the world. It is difficult to understand why it should be refused representation.
26.	Let me briefly make a few remarks about the structure of the United Nations. International conditions have changed radically; the membership of the United Nations has swelled from fifty-five in 1945 to 115 today. These changes are not adequately reflected in the Charter, which, in some ways, is quite outmoded. My delegation supports fully the view that the size of the Security Council and of the Economic and Social Council should be enlarged to reflect the true state of affairs in the United Nations. It is my pleasure to announce that my Government has already ratified the General Assembly resolution [1991 (XVIII)] for amendment of the Charter in the above manner. Furthermore, we propose that a special committee of experts should be set up to examine and recommend further amendments that are desirable and necessary in the changed context of the world.
27.	I should like to touch very briefly upon the affairs of Cyprus. We support the independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and its protection from outside intervention in its internal affairs. We particularly wish to stress that all Member States should respect the sovereignty of Cyprus and refrain from threats or use of force against it. The internal problem of Cyprus can be solved only by the people themselves, without outside intervention, on the universally accepted democratic principle of majority rule, on the basis of which all democratic countries are administered.
28.	I have so far dwelt on the political problems which confront us today. Permit me now to turn to economic issues. My Government strongly supports the aims and objectives of the Geneva Conference on Trade and Development. So long as two-thirds of the population of the world share less than 15 per cent of the world’s gross income, there can be no real peace and stability. The gap continues to widen.
29.	My Government supports the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as a permanent institution of the General Assembly. We accept the general recommendations of the conference designed to encourage the export of goods by developing countries through the reduction of tariffs and by the elimination of quantitative restrictions and internal taxation. The terms of trade which are made unfavourable for primary producing countries must be rectified through the liberalization of the internal markets of the developed countries. We also urge the flow of long-term loans on favourable terms to developing countries to supplement capital formation resources available from domestic savings and to supplement their foreign exchange reserves. Unless the industrialized countries are willing to provide funds to meet the development needs of the poorer countries, the gap will continue to widen. This problem is fundamental to the long-term solution of world problems.
30.	Finally, let me reaffirm my country’s loyalty to the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter. Kenya is confident that the United Nations, which is, and must be, the conscience and hope of mankind, will enable humanity to achieve its cherished goals of peace, progress, and happiness.