128.	Mr. President, may I congratulate you most sincerely, on my own behalf and on behalf of my Government and delegation, on your unanimous election to the presidency of the nineteenth session of the General Assembly. May I also express my thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Sosa Rodriguez, for the wise guidance with which he presided over the eighteenth session of the General Assembly.
129.	The sincere efforts of the Secretary-General and all the members of the Secretariat are indeed worthy of our appreciation and gratitude.
130.	At the outset of my statement, I should like to welcome whole-heartedly three friendly nations —Malawi, Malta and Zambia — to our family, and express our sincere wishes for their prosperity and well-being.
131.	This Organization has not yet completed the second decade of its existence. It has weathered many crises, as attested by its achievements in political, economic and social relations. It has proved to be an important factor for the promotion of friendly relations among nations and the most effective instrument for expanding the fields of economic and social co-operation, through the specialized agencies, the Technical Assistance Programme, and the Special Fund. However, this Organization can never live up to its ideals of maintaining world peace, nor can it meet its responsibilities satisfactorily in the fields of economic and social progress, unless it receives from every Member State the moral and material support which would facilitate the discharge of these responsibilities, uninhibited by factors of power politics.
132.	The crisis with which the Organization is presently faced is fraught with dangers which might threaten its very existence. We pray that the seriousness of this crisis will serve as a warning to all Member States concerned, so that they will take, both separately and collectively, the necessary positive measures that will preserve and strengthen the Organization.
133.	We look forward to the solution of this crisis, and we earnestly hope that the General Assembly, during one of its forthcoming meetings, and as soon as may be possible, will succeed in finding a basic and definitive solution to the question of peace-keeping operations, taking into consideration the positive observations and comments which were made by some delegations during the general debate. In doing so, the Organization will have preserved and strengthened the principles of the Charter dealing with international peace and security based on right, justice and freedom, and will have provided itself with the practical means for the fulfilment in this field of its fundamental responsibilities.
134.	The problem of Palestine is a human and political tragedy rarely equalled in history. It is an example of injustice and aggression defying the right of peoples to freedom, self-determination, Independence and sovereignty. I will not attempt to review the history of this tragedy, nor shall I go into details. My sole purpose is to put it into its factual, political context, which will underline the responsibilities of both the Zionist and imperialist forces.
135.	The establishment of Israel in the Middle East is the cause of instability and confusion, and has given rise to crises engulfing the entire region. As a result of the aggressions repeatedly perpetrated, by Israel against the Arab States, the peace and security of this area have been continuously threatened. It can even be said, without exaggeration, that Israel's aggressions in the past have brought the world to the brink of a major world conflagration.
136.	The history of Israel has increasingly provided us with additional, confirmation that the Zionists, who have established themselves in Palestine by aggression and usurpation, can continue to exist only through aggression and usurpation. The 1,200,000 Arab refugees who have been expelled from their homeland by force, and whose country has been unjustly occupied, are a living example of the cruel injustices which were inflicted upon them.
137.	The representatives of Israel have repeatedly pretended before this Assembly, and through their propaganda, their alleged desire for peace, but this is only a falsehood and a vain effort to mislead world opinion. These claims have been continuously proven false by repeated Israel aggressions against the Arab States, which have been condemned on numerous occasions by the United Nations Mixed Armistice Commissions, as well as by the Security Council.
138.	We heard a lengthy statement by the representative of Israel from this rostrum [1296th meeting], in which he emphasized the obligations of Member States towards the Charter and the rules of international law. Likewise, he stressed the inviolability of the territorial integrity of sovereign States. He also pointed out the difference between aggression and the liberation of a territory for military occupation. It serves no purpose to sing the praises of the Charter and its ideals and principles. What is important is for every Member State to live up to those principles and ideals.
139.	Kuwait for its part firmly believes in those principles, and abides by them in its international relations. For this reason, Kuwait feels entitled to appeal to this august body, and to all countries devoted to peace, justice and freedom, so that those principles will be applied to the people of Palestine, whose homeland has been unjustly occupied by force and violence. We should like to stress that lapse of time will never alter the rights of the Arab people of Palestine to their homeland, and will never provide any justification for aggression and usurpation.
140.	The Arab people of Palestine have been living a miserable existence in refugee camps for seventeen years, looking through barbed wire — the symbol of occupation and aggression — to their homes and fields, their mosques and churches, to their historic heritage which has bound them to this land for centuries. These people have been living with the firm determination of standing by their rights to their homeland. They are now, more than ever, firmly decided to free their country from the Zionist and colonialist forces who have been attempting to alter their personality and to eliminate their existence as an historical entity.
141.	The Palestine Liberation Organization, which was recently established by the National Congress of Arab Refugees held in Jerusalem, authentically represents the will of the Arab people of Palestine for the liberation of their country from the. aggressors and usurpers. In their legitimate struggle, the peoples of Palestine are relying not only on the full support of the Arab peoples and Governments, but also on the support of the non-aligned countries, whose Heads of State decided at their Cairo conference to: "1. Endorse the full restoration of all the rights of the Arab people of Palestine to their homeland, and their inalienable right to self-determination; "2. Declare their full support to the Arab people of Palestine in their struggle for liberation from colonialism and racism" [A/5763, sect. I],
142.	It is therefore of great significance to note that an important group of nations, which now constitutes more than half the Members of this Organization, is supporting the people of Palestine, and has appealed to the United Nations to look at the problem not simply as a problem of assisting refugees or evaluating their properties, nor as a problem of sharing or diverting the waters of the River Jordan, but as a question of restoring the rights of a people and of liberating their homeland.
143.	From this point of view, the question of Palestine should be considered with realism and courage. This is the only way to initiate a solution based on justice, which could restore to the region the peace and security it so badly needs. By supporting the legitimate rights of the people of Palestine and condemning Zionist aggression, the United Nations will prove it is living up to the ideals of justice and standing by the principles enshrined in its Charter.
144.	In their attempt to justify Israel's aggression against the Arab people of Palestine, Israel spokesmen have stated that, while the Arab States are numerous and occupy large areas in the Middle East, Israel itself is in possession of only a very small strip of land. This argument clearly displays Israel's lack of respect for the rights of other people and its reliance on the use of force. The Israel allegation that they were entitled to at least part of Palestine simply because that land was underpopulated has no legal or moral justification in international law or in the practice of international relations. The Arabs have lived in Palestine for centuries until, as a result of Zionist aggression, they were driven out of their rightful homeland.
145.	The disturbing and serious events which have taken place in Cyprus this year were a matter of deep concern to the Government of Kuwait and its people, in view of the traditionally close and friendly relations between our two countries. While we in Kuwait follow with great interest the actions under- taken by the United Nations for the restoration of peace in that country, we should like to state our full support of the right of the people of Cyprus to preserve their national unity and territorial integrity. We also express our sincere wishes that Cyprus and its people continue to enjoy full prosperity, in peace and security.
146.	The United Nations Charter provides that economic co-operation is one of the fundamental aims of the Organization, and it is most obvious that such co-operation can be achieved only in an era of peace and security based on right and justice, and on the principle of mutual respect of States for their respective rights and interests. This makes it imperative for all Member States to mobilize their full potential in the service of collective action for the success of all programmes of economic development and social progress.
147.	The economic conditions so far prevailing in all parts of the world determined the limited nature of that co-operation and directed its flow in one direction. The initiative always remained in the hands of those who possessed both financial and technical resources, while the role of the less favoured nations was limited to a passive one, leaving little chance for the development of their full potential. The developed countries concentrated their efforts on exploring new markets for their products and investments, thereby- exploiting the natural resources of the developing countries.
148.	The initiative, therefore, which has been taken by the United Nations in planning and co-ordinating the different programmes of technical assistance through the various United Nations specialized agencies, and the establishment of a permanent organ for international trade, will result in restoring international trade to its proper pattern, and will prevent the use of international trade as an instrument of economic exploitation or political influence,.
149.	To divide the world into two groups, according to criteria of wealth and levels of production, does not reflect political reality, and leads to under-estimating the human and cultural values of the developing peoples. Furthermore, the developing countries are blessed with tremendous human and natural resources which, if properly utilized, will assist them in realizing their full capabilities, and at the same time can contribute substantially to the development of the world's economy.
150.	The Government of Kuwait, fully convinced of the validity of this view, is desirous of turning its territory into a field study for the most productive experiments in economic and social development by mobilizing all available technical and scientific capabilities, not only for the good of Kuwait, but for the common good of the region as a whole.
151.	That is why the Government of Kuwait is actively participating, through the Kuwait Fund for Arab Development and the Kuwait Investment Company, in the various economic and social development programmes in the developing countries. The total amount of loans and financial assistance it has extended during the past two years amounted to more than $300 million, representing approximately 25 per cent of its national income for that period. This assistance from Kuwait was not limited to the Arab countries alone, but was also extended to other developing countries. Accordingly, Kuwait has subscribed to one third of the capital of the Arab-African Bank, and, in association with other countries, it has provided capital for the financing of development projects.
152.	It is also my pleasure to announce that the Kuwait Government has established a national company for foreign trade, contracting and investments, with a capital of $60 million to execute development projects in the developing countries. We hope that this company will, start its activities by early 1965.
153.	The United Nations Trade and Development Conference held at Geneva this year may be considered an important turning-point in the history of international commercial and economic relations. The conference indeed laid down fundamental principles and introduced new concepts which will assist the developing countries in achieving their programmes of industrialization, raising the levels of their production and exploring new markets for their raw materials and manufactured products. These principles also-offer more guarantees for stable and equitable prices for raw materials, which will permit developing countries to maintain their balance of foreign exchange payments and provide them with the necessary flow of capital for their development.
154.	We, as a participant in that conference, are happy to affirm our support for its resolutions and recommendations, as well as for the declaration of the seventy-seven developing countries. We are aware that these resolutions and recommendations fall short of our expectations; but we consider them as positive and promising steps towards a future to which we look with optimism and hope.
155.	It is most gratifying to note that the group of non-aligned countries has proven once again, through the historic resolutions it adopted at its recent conference in Cairo, that it has become an important factor in international life, both within and outside the United Nations. These States have come to the conclusion that non-alignment is a truly positive policy which does not per se mitigate their interest in international developments; rather, it aims at active participation in international co-operation with a view to establishing a permanent' and stable balance between the major political forces in the world. The Government of Kuwait, which believes in this policy of non-alignment, reaffirms here its support of the resolutions adopted at the Cairo Conference.
156.	The maintenance of world peace and security is the raison d’être of this world Organization. All Member States have solemnly declared their acceptance of the Charter; and, by so doing, they have undertaken to respect faithfully its principles, and specifically to abstain from the use of, or the threat of the use of force for the settlement of international differences. They have thus accepted the principle that the maintenance of peace is the collective responsibility of all Member States.
157.	However, the role of the United Nations is not limited to the prevention of war and armed conflicts. It has a positive function, too—to build the world in this new era on a basis which would ensure mankind a better life, compatible with human dignity and free from poverty, ignorance and disease.
158.	The question of general and complete disarmament is, in the view of my Government, the most vital problem that faces the United Nations and the world at large. In fact, the survival of mankind and also the prospects of any substantial economic development depend basically on the solution to be achieved in this field, especially through the conversion to peaceful uses of the resources now devoted to military purposes. My Government supports all efforts made in this direction, and approves of every step taken by the great Powers and the United Nations towards this end.
159.	The period of highly dangerous tension which the world has recently passed through has been a bitter and most difficult experience. Nevertheless, it has led to the confirmation of two fundamental realities: first, that the peoples of the world earnestly desire peace and are keenly determined to preserve it; secondly, that different social, political and economic systems call for not only passive peaceful coexistence, but also for active, constructive co-operation for the benefit of mankind, which will divert effort from the arms race to a positive competition for the promotion of a better future for all the peoples of the world.
160.	The realization of such a concept is the ultimate hope of mankind; and, if adopted by the Member States and supported by the General Assembly, it will generate enough vitality and dynamism to make it possible for us to withstand the dangers inherent in the various problems facing the world, and ultimately to solve those problems effectively.
161.	The struggle of colonial peoples for their freedom and independence and the great victory they have realized over the colonial forces is one of the most significant events of modern history. The United Nations has played an important role in leading this struggle to a successful conclusion. It has been the forum where nations suffering under colonialism have raised their voices and claimed their right to independence and self-determination. This battle, however, is not yet finished; many peoples, still suffering under colonial rule, are determined more than ever to continue their struggle with faith and courage until they achieve final victory.
162.	My country, which believes in the right of all peoples to self-determination, independence and sovereignty, supports the struggle of all colonial peoples suffering under the yoke of colonialism, whether they be in Oman, in Southern Arabia, in the Portuguese colonies, Southern Rhodesia or South West Africa. My Government stands by the colonial peoples in their struggle, and it condemns, at the same time, the policy of apartheid practised by the Government of South Africa against the majority of its people. My Government, in adopting this position, complies with the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council. The principles proclaimed in those resolutions are enshrined in the Constitution of my country, which is based on human dignity and the right of peoples to self-determination.
163.	This session opened in an atmosphere which caused great apprehension among many delegations regarding the future of the Organization. Despite this pessimism, they have all exhibited their faith in the Organization and their deep concern to preserve it as the living symbol of international co-operation and as the guardian of world peace and security.
164.	Kuwait, as a small nation which firmly believes in the United Nations and stands by its principles, expresses its sincere hope that this crisis will be solved and that a new era will be inaugurated, in which the United Nations will be enriched by the necessary vitality so that it may perform its duties in promoting freedom and justice in a world where peace and security prevail.