43.	Mr. President, allow me first of all to congratulate you sincerely on your unanimous election to the post of President of the nineteenth session of the General Assembly. Our delegation wholly shares the view expressed by many previous speakers that your election to this high and responsible post does honour to Africa, which is playing an increasing part in the life and work of the United Nations. At the same time, we also regard your election as further recognition of the positive contribution which is being made by the young independent States, not only of Africa but of other continents also, to the struggle for peace, for international co-operation and universal security, and to the cause of strengthening the United Nations as the instrument called upon to achieve these noble aims.
44.	Since the last session of the General Assembly a number of important events have occurred which, in my delegation's view, can have a positive effect on the course of this session and the results it achieves.
45.	My delegation has in mind first and foremost the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. That Conference formulated a number of important recommendations aimed at improving and normalizing international economic and trade relations and set up permanent machinery to deal with questions connected with the development of those relations in strict observance of the interests of the different groups of States. The results achieved, in that great forum mark a major victory for those forces which advocate the development of economic co-operation among all States on the basis of the principles of respect for their sovereign equality and mutual advantage, without discrimination or artificial restrictions, the forces which support the creation of conditions for the accelerated development of the developing countries national economies — which signifies principally the liquidation of the pernicious consequences of colonial domination.
46.	In my delegation's view, the Conference on Trade and Development, despite its shortcomings and defects, opened up a new and important field in the constructive work of the United Nations and, at the same time, showed that practical steps must be taken to solve the 'important economic problems which are already beginning to appear prominently in the work of the Organization. The Mongolian delegation considers that the present session must give serious attention to consolidating the gains made at that Conference and to seeking a solution to a number of important problems concerning international economic and trade relations which the Conference has as yet been unable to solve constructively.
47.	Another event of great significance was the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries, which was held at Cairo in October 1964. That Conference clearly demonstrated the effectiveness and the constructive role of the policy of non-alignment, which has become the official policy of countries comprising nearly half of the independent States of the world.
48.	The Declaration entitled "Programme for Peace and International Co-operation", which was adopted at that Conference, indicates realistic ways of solving such important problems of our times as the elimination of colonialism and neo-colonialism, the implementation of general and complete disarmament, the strengthening of the policy of peaceful coexistence, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the peaceful settlement of disputes and other problems appearing on the agenda of this session of the General Assembly.
49.	The results of the Cairo Conference have shown that the policy of non-alignment is an effective expression of the principles of peaceful coexistence. In this connexion the Mongolian delegation expresses its whole-hearted support for the recommendation of the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries for the adoption, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the United Nations, of a Declaration on the Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
50.	The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic also attaches great importance to the second Conference of the States members of the Organization of African Unity, which expressed in its resolutions the determination of the peoples of Africa to intensify the struggle against imperialism and colonialism in all its forms and manifestations, the struggle for peace and friendship among the peoples of the world.
51.	In my delegation's view, the Cairo Conferences of the States members of the Organization of African Unity and of non-aligned countries have demonstrated once again the great efforts that the young independent States are making in the struggle against imperialism and colonialism, the struggle for peace and the freedom of the peoples.
52.	The socialist countries, consistently pursuing their peace-loving foreign policy, have as in previous years taken practical steps aimed at strengthening confidence and peaceful co-operation among States and at consolidating international peace and security — steps which are consonant with the spirit and requirements of the United Nations Charter. This is attested, in particular, by the USSR proposal for the conclusion of an international agreement (or treaty) for the renunciation by States of the use of force in the settlement of territorial disputes and questions concerning frontiers [A/5751] and the Memorandum of the Soviet Government on measures for the further reduction of international tension and limitation of the arms race [A/5827], which was submitted on 7 December 1964 for consideration at this session.
53.	It is also attested by the recent decision of the Government of the USSR to make a further cut of 500 million roubles in its military budget for 1965. My delegation expresses the hope that other Powers will follow this excellent example.
54.	The concern of the socialist countries for the improvement of the international situation and the strengthening of peace is also clearly expressed in actions taken by other socialist countries in the field of foreign policy. The proposal of the Government of the Polish People's Republic for a freezing of nuclear forces in central Europe, the proposal of the Government of the German Democratic Republic for the conclusion of a peace treaty between the two German States and that Government's draft of a treaty for the complete renunciation of atomic weapons by both German States, which was circulated among the members of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, and a number of other important proposals and actions in the field of foreign policy by other socialist countries are indeed aimed at improving the general world climate and at normalizing the situation and increasing stability in various parts of the world.
55.	All these factors create the appropriate conditions and prerequisites for the normal work of this session of the General Assembly and for a businesslike discussion of the problems confronting the United Nations.
56.	It must, however, be noted with regret that the artificial inflation by the United States Government of questions relating to the financial difficulties of the United Nations is creating an atmosphere of uncertainty and anxiety, a fact which must inevitably affect the conditions in which this session has to work.
57.	Moreover, the actions of the ruling circles in the United States and certain other NATO countries, which are directed against peace and tranquillity and against the freedom and national independence of the peoples, are aggravating the international situation and causing grave prejudice thereby to the relaxation of tension in international relations which has resulted from the conclusion of the Moscow Treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapon tests in three environments and a number of subsequent measures taken in the spirit of that Treaty.	
58.	The situation of South-East Asia, and in South Viet-Nam in particular, is causing anxiety all over the world. For many years now the United States has been waging a senseless brutal war against the patriotic forces of South Viet-Nam. In gross violation of the terms of the 1954 Geneva Agreement, the United States has converted South Viet-Nam into an armed camp from which it is committing aggressive acts against the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and interfering in the domestic affairs of Cambodia and Laos. Moreover, some responsible persons in the Pentagon are strongly advocating the extension of the war to neighbouring countries, and in particular to the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. To judge by Press reports, the United States is endeavouring to use its old and favourite imperialist methods in this regard and is goading its puppets in South Viet-Nam into this dangerous venture.
59.	The Mongolian people and its Government stand resolutely beside the Viet-Namese people in its struggle against the aggressive acts of the imperialists and their lackeys. Our delegation has stated before and now states once again that, neither brutal punitive measures nor vast expenditures of dollars nor frequent changes of puppets will be able to save a regime in South Viet-Nam which has become anathema to the people.
60.	The Mongolian people calls upon the United States to withdraw its troops from the South-East Asian region immediately. Only when that is done will the dangerous centre of international conflict in that region be eliminated.
61.	The far from stable situation in the Congo has recently deteriorated sharply as a result of the armed intervention by Belgium and the United States in that country, with the assistance of the United Kingdom Government. That armed intervention was undertaken on the pretext of rescuing the white population — the so-called hostages. This is an old and favourite method of the colonialists. The true nature and purpose of that open intervention are clear to anyone who is objective. The representatives of a number of African States, in their statements in the Security Council, have once again completely exposed the aggressive nature of the United States and Belgian venture.
62.	The situation in the Congo is fraught with danger not only for the people of that country, but also for the freedom and independence of all the peoples of the African continent. Foreign intervention in the internal affairs of the Congo must be stopped forthwith and all foreign troops, including mercenaries, must be withdrawn from that country in order to avoid a repetition of the bitter lesson of the past and to prevent the crisis from worsening. The Mongolian People's Republic supports the efforts of the Organization of African Unity to solve the Congo problem in the interests of strengthening peace and security in Africa.
63.	The Mongolian people is following the course of events in Cyprus with anxiety. It is common knowledge that certain NATO Powers, for selfish ends, are attempting to sow dissension among Cypriots of Greek and Turkish origin, thus creating a serious threat to the freedom and independence of the Republic of Cyprus. We are in favour of settling the Cyprus question by giving the Cypriots themselves full opportunity to solve their internal problems in the interests of preserving and strengthening the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that State.
64.	The Mongolian delegation strongly condemns the policy of gross intervention and blackmail which the Governments of the United States and of some of that country’s partners among the members of the Organization of American States are pursuing with regard to the Republic of Cuba. That policy, whose instruments include subversive activities and political and economic blockade, is aimed at forcibly changing the social system which has been freely chosen by the Cuban people and which is highly distasteful to reactionary circles in those countries. All those who are for justice and respect the rules of international law and the principles of the United Nations Charter must condemn actions of this kind.
65.	Our people stands resolutely by the side of the Cuban people in its struggle against the aggressive schemes of the imperialists, its struggle to consolidate its revolutionary gains.
66.	The Mongolian People's Republic, as a peace-loving Asian State, is also profoundly concerned at the dangerous situation which has arisen in its vicinity. Korea continues to be split into two parts and no one knows how long this abnormal situation may last. For more than ten years now the people of South Korea have been subjected to brutal foreign exploitation as a result of their country's transformation into a United States military base. The so-called "Korean question" appears each year on the agenda of the General Assembly; under that item we are asked to discuss the report of the so-called "United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea", which always seeks to justify the military occupation of South Korea. Our delegation continues to hold the view that the Korean question — more accurately the question of the restoration of Korean unity — is an internal affair of the Korean people itself and that the United Nations has no right to discuss it. The only correct method of solving the Korean problem is to put an end to the military occupation of the southern part of Korea and to have the United States troops immediately withdrawn from that country. This alone will enable the Korean people to decide their own fate without foreign intervention.
67. This far from complete account indicates how dangerous still are the forces opposed to peace and friendly co-operation among States, to the freedom, independence and normal economic and social development of the peoples. At the same time it shows that the ruling circles in certain Western Powers, and first and foremost the United States, are time and again resorting to the "positions of strength" policy which, in view of the present alignment of forces, may have the most dangerous consequences.
68.	One of the features of our times is the steadily increasing awareness on the part of the peoples of the world that the arms race and the accumulation of armaments cannot continue any longer, since they are not only diverting enormous human and material resources from their true purpose — the creation of material values for the good of mankind — but are increasing the likelihood and the danger of a thermonuclear world war.
69.	Weapons of mass destruction have become so perfected and stockpiles of these weapons have become so great that in the event of armed conflict entire countries could be wiped off the face of the earth, while mankind and the civilization it had created would suffer incredible losses. In these circumstances, the question of removing the threat of thermonuclear war has become most acute. This aim can be achieved only through the implementation of general and complete disarmament.
70.	The Mongolian People’s Republic has expressed resolute support for the immediate implementation of general and complete disarmament under strict international control. The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic has endorsed the idea of convening a world disarmament conference in which every State in the world would take part.
71.	Our delegation considers it unnecessary to expatiate here on the lack of progress on the question of disarmament and the futility of the work of the Eighteen-Nation Committee which has been devoting itself to this question for more than three years. The representatives of the socialist countries and of other States which genuinely desire the rapid implementation of general and complete disarmament have spoken on this subject in sufficient detail and have completely exposed the reasons for this far from normal state of affairs.
72.	Without in any way belittling the importance of destroying conventional armaments, our delegation would like to place particular stress on the idea that disarmament should begin with the elimination of the means of waging thermonuclear war, i.e., with general nuclear disarmament. In other words, the question of the universal prohibition of all types of nuclear weapon tests, the prevention of the further spread of such weapons and the prohibition and elimination of these weapons of mass destruction and of the means for their delivery must be regarded as the crucial and foremost question in the entire complex of measures for the implementation of general and complete disarmament.
73.	The memorandum by the Soviet Government on measures for the further reduction of international tension and limitation of the arms race puts forward, along with other, partial, measures, important proposals aimed at the speedy achievement of the aims I have indicated. My delegation therefore urges the General Assembly to give very serious consideration to the proposals contained in that important document.
74.	In this connexion, my delegation also stresses the importance of the proposal by the Government of the Polish People's Republic for a freezing of nuclear arms in Central Europe, to which I referred at the beginning of this statement, and also of the proposal by the Government of the German Democratic Republic, whereby the two German States would undertake not to manufacture or by any means acquire nuclear weapons and not to allow other States to station such weapons in their territories.
75.	The Mongolian People's Republic also supports the proposals of other States aimed at reaching agreement on the prohibition and elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
76.	Our Government appeals to the nuclear Powers to reach agreement at the earliest possible date on the prohibition of underground testing of nuclear weapons, and at the same time calls on those States which have not yet acceded to the Moscow Treaty to become parties to it and scrupulously to observe its provisions. Our Government has expressed support for the convening of a conference to sign a convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons, an event which would represent an important step towards the elimination of such weapons.
77.	In the light of what I have said, it is clear what irreparable harm to the cause of international peace and security would result from the creation of the so-called multilateral NATO nuclear force which the Governments of the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany have been strenuously promoting in recent days.
78.	Our Government and public opinion in our country are strongly opposed to the creation of this force, since that would mean giving the West German militarists and revanchists access to nuclear weapons. In addition to all its other consequences the execution of this plan would create a major obstacle to the achievement of agreements on the question of the implementation of general and complete disarmament under strict international control and on partial measures aimed at promoting a relaxation of international tension and averting the threat of a world war.
79.	In this connexion, the Mongolian delegation states that the German problem, which directly bears on peace and security in Europe and throughout the world, must not be solved in a way that would encourage the revanchist claims of the militarists in the Federal Republic of Germany and would mark a concession to their desire to obtain nuclear weapons.
80.	The existence of two sovereign German States in Europe — the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany — is an indisputable fact. Yet western propaganda, deliberately distorting the true facts, is endeavouring to make out that only one German State exists — the Federal Republic of Germany, which presumably represents the German people. At the same time, certain Western representatives are making demagogic speeches about the need to recognize the German people's right of self-determination. This manoeuvre is designed to justify the desire of the West German militarists to swallow up the German Democratic Republic.
81.	In certain Western circles recently a discussion has been deliberately started on the possibility of a rapid solution of the problem of unifying Germany. We do not deny the importance of a unification of Germany on a peaceful democratic basis, but we would point out that the mere fact of the existence of two German States is not a threat to peace. As everyone knows, a united militaristic Germany has twice subjected mankind to destructive war. The danger lies in the policy of militarism and revanchism that is being pursued by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany.
82.	The Government of the German Democratic Republic, on the other hand, pursues a peace-loving policy aimed at strengthening world peace and developing good-neighbourly relations with all States. This policy of the German Democratic Republic is based on the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter. The Government of the German Democratic Republic tirelessly seeks ways of facilitating the just settlement of the German problem in accordance with the vital interests of the entire German people and puts forward practical proposals designed to improve and normalize relations between the two German States.
83.	The only correct solution of the German problem is. the recognition of both German States and their subsequent admission to membership in the United Nations, the conclusion of a peace treaty with them, and the development of normal relations between these two States. Such a solution of the German problem accords with the vital interests of the German people and of the peoples of Europe and the entire world.
84.	Among the partial measures designed to promote the reaching of an agreement on general and complete disarmament, our delegation attaches special importance to the liquidation of military bases in foreign territories.
85.	Events in South-East Asia, the Congo, Cyprus, and a few other parts of the world show how great a danger the military bases represent to the cause of international peace and security. They are constantly being used by the old and new colonial Powers for intervention in the domestic affairs of other States with a view to suppressing the national liberation movements.
86.	The imperialist Powers have enmeshed many parts of the world in a network of military bases. The United States alone has over 2,200 military bases scattered over ninety different countries and regions. These bases are aimed primarily at the socialist countries and other peace-loving States. They are a constant source of international tension.
87.	The threat which these foreign military bases represent to the freedom and independence of peoples is being increasingly recognized by world public opinion.
88.	The independent States of Africa have come out strongly in favour of the liquidation of military bases in their continent. The Second Conference of Non- Aligned Countries at Cairo has called on the States which maintain troops and bases in other countries to remove them at once.
89.	The Mongolian people condemns the plans of the United States and other Powers to set up bases in the Indian Ocean and demands the immediate liquidation of the military bases of the imperialist Powers situated in Taiwan, in Okinawa, inside Japan, in South Korea and elsewhere in Asia and Oceania. It also advocates the rapid liquidation of all other military bases, wherever they may be.
90.	We believe that the time has come for the United Nations to hold a separate debate on the question of the liquidation of military bases in foreign territories and to adopt resolutions consonant with the ever-growing demands of peoples and peace-loving States.	-
91.	On the opening day of the current session, the Mongolian delegation associated itself with the congratulations addressed to the representatives of three new States — Malawi, Zambia and Malta — on the occasion of their admission to membership in the United Nations.
92.	It is encouraging to note that the area of freedom and progress is widening, while the territory under colonial domination is steadily being reduced. Of the fifty-nine Asian and African countries which are Members of the United Nations, the great majority achieved national independence since the Second World War.
93.	Yet it cannot be said that the process of decolonization is keeping pace with the requirements of our time. The reason for this abnormal situation lies not in any failure on the part of the peoples of colonies and dependent territories to give full expression to their desire for freedom and independence, but in the stubborn refusal of the so-called administering Powers to give effect to the provisions of the historic Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)].
94.	There are still today, in Africa alone, over twenty colonies, protectorates and other dependent territories, with a total population of some 25 million. Blood is being shed in Angola, Mozambique, So-called Portuguese Guinea, Aden, Oman, and many another dependent territory, where the colonial Powers are taking cruel reprisals against peoples fighting for their freedom and independence. Our delegation pledges the staunch support of its people and Government to the peoples of colonial and dependent countries which are engaged in a heroic struggle for liberation from alien domination. It declares that it is high time to put an end, once and for all, to the misdeeds of the colonialists.
95.	The United Nations must take all possible measures to ensure the effective implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples and of its other resolutions, adopted with reference to separate territories.
96.	The struggle against neo-colonialism is becoming as vital as the struggle for the complete liberation of colonial and dependent countries and territories. As correctly noted in the Declaration of the Cairo Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries, racial discrimination, economic pressure, subversion, intervention and the threat of force are favourite neo-colonialist devices.
97.	In our opinion, one of the most important means that the young independent States can use in a successful struggle against neo-colonialism is the accelerated development of an independent national economy and the expansion of co-operation with all other States on a truly equal footing.
98.	In this connexion, our delegation wishes to state that the Geneva Conference on Trade and Development was a step forward in intensifying the struggle against neo-colonialism. It took important decisions aimed at strengthening the economic position of the young States and consolidating the material foundations of the policy of peaceful coexistence of countries with different social systems and of nations great and small. 
99.	The policy, of apartheid, that worst of the legacies of colonialism, is a great evil where all peoples of the African continent are concerned.
100.	The imperialist Powers are anxious to perpetuate the racist regime in the Republic of South Africa as a focus of infection in the body of Africa which will maintain the continent in a state of fever and represent a continuing threat to international peace and security.
101.	The Mongolian people and Government strongly condemn the policy of apartheid and believe that it is high time for the United Nations to take the necessary action to ensure implementation of its resolutions directed against that policy.
102.	The problems with which the United Nations is faced as a result of contemporary developments in international life all point to the urgent need to strengthen the United Nations and make it more effective.'
103.	When we think of strengthening the United Nations as the international organization called upon to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of its purposes and principles, our first question is: in how far is the principle of the universality of its membership being observed? In this respect, all is far from well. Indeed, because of the short-sighted policy of certain Western Powers, the People's Republic of China, which is one of the founding Members of the United Nations and a permanent member of the Security Council, is still being denied its lawful rights in the United Nations.
104.	On the other hand, faced with the growing clamour of world public opinion for the restitution of the rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations, some circles in the West have been adumbrating the possibility of recognizing the existence of two Chinas.
105.	Our delegation categorically opposes this "two Chinas" concept. It demands that the United Nations should as rapidly as possible remedy this crying injustice, where the place of the People's Republic of China in the Organization is occupied by the Chiang Kai-shek clique, which the Chinese people repudiated long ago. The People's Republic of China must take its rightful place in the United Nations: the sooner this is done, the better for the United Nations itself.
106.	We are also in favour of admitting all other States which meet the requirements of the Charter. Another important measure to strengthen the United Nations consists in bringing the composition of its principal organs into line with the great changes in its membership in recent years. In this connexion, our delegation takes pleasure in informing the Assembly that the Government of the Mongolian People's Republic is prepared in the very near future to ratify the resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its eighteenth session with regard to expanding the membership of the Security Council mid the Economic and Social Council [resolution 1991 (XVIII)].
107.	The problems of the modern world lay complex tasks upon the United Nations. In order that it may successfully solve these problems we must steadily increases the effectiveness of its activity on the basis, of strict compliance with the Charter, which is the unshakable foundation it stands upon.
108.	Many of the speakers who have preceded me dwelt at some length, in one context or another, on the United Nations operations in the Near East and in the Congo, and showed a tendency to explain the present financial difficulties of, the United Nations solely by the fact that these operations were carried out. They did not trouble to ask themselves whence came the need to undertake those operations, how were the relevant decisions taken, and to what extent the armed forces which operated under the United Nations flag carried out the tasks which they should have carried out in strict accordance with the purposes of the United Nations.
109.	Our delegation firmly believes that in all cases in which the use of United Nations armed forces might be called for, such questions should be answered first — in other words, that the provisions of the United Nations Charter should always be faithfully observed.
110.	The Mongolian People's Republic favours the strengthening of the United Nations as an instrument for the maintenance of peace and is ready to support any and all proposals to that end. In particular, our delegation supports the Soviet Government's memorandum of 10 July 1964 on measures to increase the effectiveness of the United Nations in maintaining international peace and security [A/5721]. We believe that this memorandum furnishes a sound basis for a fruitful discussion and positive solution of questions relating to the strengthening of the United Nations on the basis of strict compliance with the Charter.
111.	In its foreign policy, the Mongolian People's Republic is guided by the principle of the peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems. From the day on which it was first proclaimed, the policy of peaceful coexistence has served to defend and strengthen all that is revolutionary, progressive and just in its struggle against the forces of reaction., It is gaining increasing recognition, and in present circumstances it is the only alternative to a world war.
112.	One of the most important points in the foreign policy of the Mongolian People's Republic is support for the national liberation movement and the further development of friendly relations with the newly independent States.
113.	Our country is interested in developing mutually profitable economic relations, on an equal footing, with all States.
114.	It views the further expansion of friendly relations and co-operation with all States and the steady development of its economy and culture as its contribution to the attainment of the lofty purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
115.	In conclusion, may I express the hope of my delegation that the General Assembly at its nineteenth session will be able to overcome its temporary difficulties and complete its work successfully, and that it will bring about the necessary conditions whereby the year 1965 may truly become the year of international co-operation, the year of the triumph of the universality principle of the United Nations, and the year in which colonialism will be wiped off the face of the earth.