86.	At the outset, I should like to convey the greetings of my Sovereign, His Majesty King Mahendra, and his good wishes for the success of the nineteenth session of the General Assembly.
87.	It is also my honour and privilege to express on behalf of the Nepalese delegation our heart-felt congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your election by acclamation to the high office of President of the nineteenth session of the General Assembly. Your election, besides being an eloquent tribute to your personal qualities, and to your country that blazed the trail of colonial Africa's independence movement in the 1950's, is a tribute to the vibrant resurgence of the African continent, whose great sons have proved themselves second to none in their dedication to the cause of peace and progress in the world. Needless to say, your election to the presidency is a matter of the greatest satisfaction and pride to all African-Asian States. Familiar as we all are with your intimate knowledge of the working of the United Nations and your diplomatic skill and charm, my delegation feels confident that, under your able guidance, this session will successfully cope with the fundamental and difficult problems faced by the Organization.
88.	With deep feelings, my delegation also would like to record its thanks and appreciation to Mr. Carlos Sosa Rodriguez of Venezuela for his efficient and impartial handling of the affairs of the eighteenth session of the General Assembly.
89.	We feel particularly happy that three more new States', which have attained independence after heroic struggle, have been admitted to this family of nations, and we would like to avail ourselves of this opportunity to welcome Malawi, Malta and Zambia in our midst.
90.	During the course of its nineteen years, the United Nations has grown in many ways. Starting with a membership of fifty-one, it now has 115 Members and has almost attained the goal of universality. This achievement is undoubtedly significant for the United Nations, whose primary function it is to attain unity of purpose amidst the diversity of the world, for the realization of the aspirations common to all mankind in all ages, as enshrined in the Charter.
91.	The Organization has been able to stand the test of time with reasonable success and has achieved, to its credit, effective and workable solutions of several seemingly insoluble international crises. Although still far from becoming an effective international body for the maintenance of peace and order, the Organization has not only developed new methods and techniques of diplomacy, but has also steadily grown in concept in response to the challenges and changed circumstances of our time.
92.	Although the great expectations of closest collaboration among the big Powers that were held at the time the Charter was formulated have not been fulfilled, the record of the United Nations even in the area of peace-keeping has been impressive. To a considerable extent, the United Nations has come to symbolize in practice those purposes, embodied in the Charter, which represent the aspirations of all mankind: to maintain international peace and security and to bring about adjustment or settlement of international disputes by peaceful means, to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples; to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character; and to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
93.	In a world over-shadowed by the cold war, which has fortunately been in a process of thaw lately, the importance of the United Nations, with its positive approach to world problems, has been increasingly felt. But we should not close our eyes to the fact that today, in its nineteenth year, the United Nations faces a difficult prospect. The time has come once again for us to renew our faith, in the words of our distinguished Secretary-General, in the "unique value of the United Nations as an instrument for reconciling differences of opinion and not only as a framework in which they can manifest themselves" [A/5801/Add.l, sect. IV].
94.	As far as Nepal is concerned, I should like to renew our assurance to this Assembly once again regarding our faith in the United Nations. Nepal is a staunch believer in the Charter of the United Nations, and regards it as a source of strength to people everywhere and as the guardian of the interests of all big and small States. In our present-day world of conflicts that have world-wide repercussions, the United Nations is the best hope for the realization of the day when the world will be truly at peace and harmony and when freedom and justice will be assured for all.
95.	Regarding the international climate, we all find a welcome relaxation in international tension, and a climate of peace is discernible between East and West owing to the important gains in favour of peace, such as the Moscow Treaty on the partial ban of nuclear tests in outer space, under water and in the atmosphere, and the agreement between the United States and the USSR not to place in orbit any object equipped with nuclear capacity [see resolution 1884 (XVIII)]. These constitute significant advances towards the goal of general and complete disarmament which, by common consent, is the most important and perhaps the most complex perennial question faced by the United Nations. His Majesty's Government of Nepal has hailed all these measures as a great step taken by the three big Powers towards universal disarmament, and has associated itself with these steps by signing the partial test ban treaty. His Majesty's Government of Nepal believes that the cause of peace will be strengthened if all the peace-loving nations which have not signed this treaty could see their way to sign it. At the same time, we should like to add our voice to the universal feeling that the scope of the partial thermonuclear test ban treaty should be extended to cover a ban on underground tests also.
96.	Regarding disarmament, it need hardly be emphasized that developing countries, like Nepal, have a vested interest in it. We are all aware that disarmament in practice is vital to stable peace and security in the world. As a developing country, Nepal also looks forward to the day when large resources released by disarmament should become available for the development of the poorer regions of the world.
97.	Nepal, ever since its admission to the United Nations, has always advocated universal disarmament. For this, it is necessary to create world public opinion in favour of international control over armaments and for the elimination of the production of weapons of mass destruction. In this connexion, I should once again like to express my delegation's appreciation for the work done by the Eighteen Nation Committee on Disarmament in Geneva.
98.	We realize that the pace of progress at the Geneva negotiations has been rather slow, but this should be no reflection on the untiring efforts of the Committee. The difficulties involved are inherent in the complexity of the problem. His Majesty's Government of Nepal, therefore, believes that the paramount need for the conclusion of a more comprehensive treaty on general and complete disarmament, through strict international control and the banning of nuclear and thermonuclear weapon tests, requires vigorous efforts both within and outside the periphery of the United Nations.
99.	This leads me to what appears to us to be a vitally related question, namely, the proper representation of China in the United Nations. Nepal, since its admission to this world body, has been constantly urging the replacement of Kuomintang China by the People's Republic of China. With a population of 690 million people, the People's Republic of China will be a great force for peace, and in fact no discussions on international issues make much sense without the contribution of a substantial portion of the world’s population. We have always held that there is only one China, namely the People's Republic of China, a potential great Power in today's world; and to refuse it its rightful place in the United Nations creates an anomalous and unreal situation. It will therefore be in the best interests of this world body that the Government of the People's Republic of China should be recognized as the only legal government of China to be represented in the United Nations.
100.	Undoubtedly, the major actors in initiating any positive improvement in the international climate are the major Powers, but the role of peace-loving non- aligned nations also, both in the United Nations and outside the Organization, has by no means been insignificant. The emergence of successful nationalist movements in Asia and Africa, and their increasing faith in the policy of non-alignment and the Charter of the United Nations, have been important developments in the international situation. The change in the attitude of the two powerful blocs to the policy of non-alignment is an excellent commentary on the growing importance of this policy.
101.	Events of major importance in the evolution of non-alignment have been the non-aligned summit conferences held in Belgrade in 1961 and in Cairo in October this year. Another major development has been the emergence of new independent African countries and the African solidarity movement. The Addis Ababa and Cairo Conferences of the Heads of independent African States constitute most important landmarks in the history of Africa.
102.	The unanimous decisions taken by the Conferences of non-aligned countries and African countries on various aspects of international questions should contribute to the reduction of world tensions and the ultimate achievement of world peace and security.
103.	Nepal, too, is a small, non-aligned country. Urged by the desire to keep away from the ideological conflict and power politics, Nepal has declared its faith in the principles of peaceful coexistence and peaceful negotiations, and in the policy of positive non-alignment. It has declared its belief in the Charter of the United Nations as an instrument for the promotion of international peace and security, and its willingness to work for the strengthening of the United Nations. With the post-war international developments, there has been a growing realization in Nepal that every nation should adopt a policy of settlement of disputes by peaceful methods; that is the policy to which His Majesty's Government of Nepal is committed.
104.	Adherence to United Nations principles of peaceful coexistence and peaceful negotiations based on equality and mutual respect has guided Nepal's view on world affairs.
105.	Turning to the critical situation in South-East Asia today, we therefore cannot express our grief at the opportunities that have slipped by during the years of peace which had been brought about by the 1954 Geneva agreement. The forcible division of nations in the region of South-East Asia has not been conducive to peace in the area.
106.	The operations of the international commissions for supervision and control both in Laos and Viet- Nam have been made difficult as a result of infiltration and interference with foreign weapons and military personnel. The recent developments in South Viet-Nam also constitute a very serious threat to international peace.
107.	Laos has plunged into a three-cornered shadowy civil war. The Laotian leaders of various political tendencies have not yet succeeded, in spite of several meetings, in reconciling their differences. Nor did the recent Paris meeting of the three political leaders produce any positive result. In these circumstances, it is the desire of my delegation that the United Nations should give thoughtful consideration to the settlement of this problem through peaceful negotiation and understanding among the parties concerned. Nepal finds that proper conditions should be created, under the aegis of the international control commission, to enable the people of Laos to express their views for the determination of their future on their own, and without interference from outside.
108.	Similar considerations apply, in our view, to the situation in Cyprus. There are two aspects of the Cyprus problem. One is the maintenance of law and order; the other is related to a long-term solution, that is, the political settlement between the two Cypriot communities. With respect to the first aspect, we are of the opinion that the United Nations forces in Cyprus have been largely successful in helping to maintain law and order. A more serious problem Is the drawing up of an agreed formula for political settlement. The United Nations efforts in this direction also, through the efforts of the mediators appointed by the Secretary-General, are highly commendable. His Majesty's Government wishes the best success for those efforts.
109.	My Government holds that the future of the Cypriot people must be settled by themselves, In cooperation with the peace-keeping agencies of the United Nations. In order to do this, His Majesty's Government of Nepal thinks it the duty of the United Nations to ensure and safeguard the integrity, unity and independence of its Member States, to end outside interference first and to create conditions for the solution of political settlement thereafter.
110.	Besides the principles of peaceful coexistence and peaceful negotiations based on mutual respect and equality of States which Nepal has always practised in its relations with friendly countries, Nepal's foreign policy has been guided by its moral opposition to the inequalities and injustices of colonialism as well as of racial segregation or apartheid.
111.	It is our view that these evils are not only morally indefensible but that they also create explosive situations that threaten international peace and security. That is why these issues have been before the United Nations since its inception. Although the progress made in the emancipation of dependent territories under the aegis of the United Nations has been gratifying, we cannot forget that there are yet millions of people struggling for their freedom and liberation. Their hopes are pinned on our efforts here in the halls of the United Nations to gain for them human dignity, equality and liberty from colonial domination.
112.	Nepal has consistently advocated the eradication of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations. Colonialism in its worst form still exists in the Portuguese colonies of Angola, Mozambique, and other areas. Likewise, the situation in Southern Rhodesia is explosive. Colonialism also exists in South West Africa, British Guiana and elsewhere. The Committee of Twenty-Four has done extensive work in examining their cases. My delegation should like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation for the Committee's work,
113.	My delegation is prepared to do its utmost within the framework of the United Nations Charter to accelerate the pace of independence for all the dependent territories. We hope that, with the ’co-operation of the administering Powers, this onerous task undertaken by the United Nations will come to a successful conclusion before the end of the decade.
114.	However, the Intransigence shown by the Portuguese Government about finding peaceful ways of granting independence to the people of Angola and Mozambique is certainly deplorable. The situation in those territories, and also in Southern Rhodesia, needs to be kept under the constant review of the main organs of the United Nations.
115.	Nepal has consistently denounced the apartheid policy of the Government of South Africa, which, like the Portuguese Government, also has buried its head in the sand to avoid the winds of change. The apartheid policy of South Africa is in gross contradiction to the principle of equality of all people without distinction as to race, religion or political ideology, as guaranteed in the United Nations Charter.
116.	We unequivocally support the resolutions passed by the African Heads of State and Government in Cairo, in July 1964, condemning the racial policy of the Verwoerd regime. We call upon all the Member States of the United Nations to give that policy a decent burial by means of a general trade boycott and other suitable measures in consonance with the Charter.
117.	My delegation would strongly recommend a thorough consideration of the report submitted by the Special Committee on the Policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa [A/5825 and Add.l], My delegation is closely associated with the work of this Committee. Our close study of the situation in South Africa has confirmed our fears that measures once considered drastic by my Government should be taken to save not only South Africa but the continent of Africa and the rest of the world from the grave consequences of the racial hatred and animosity that lie at the root of the apartheid policy.
118.	We are of the opinion that besides political questions and issues of human rights, the causes of potential world conflict can also be found in the ever- widening gap between the rich and the poor countries of the world.
119.	The developing countries, though in the middle of the Development Decade, have not been able to register a growth rate which could lead them to the modest target set for the United Nations Development Decade. The chasm between the rich and the poor countries has widened continuously, and it will continue to widen unless the recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development are vigorously implemented. The unfavourable terms of trade for the developing countries are creating such economic tensions between the northern and southern groups of countries that ultimately they will prove far more dangerous than the East-West political tensions.
120.	In my own country, an increasing realization has dawned in the minds of the people that their wellbeing and prosperity is linked to the happiness and peace of other peoples of the world. They have therefore discarded the outmoded systems of social and economic structure of their lives, and have embarked upon a system suitable to their national genius and traditions. His Majesty King Mahendra, to whom the credit for these revolutionary changes goes, has made it abundantly clear, inaction as well as in words, that the destiny of a particular community cannot be worked out in isolation or apart from the destiny of the rest of the world.
121.	We, in Nepal, have therefore been trying to mould our national life in line with the revolutionary changes which have been occurring every moment in our world. Nepal's new "Panchayat" system of democracy has its origin in this line of thinking, and embodies in its philosophy as well as in its practice the healthy tradition, genius and will of our peace-loving and constructive people. The system of "Panchayat" democracy has provided them with the machinery for maximum possible participation in their government, and for engaging directly in its task of social and economic development under national development plans.
122.	Realizing fully the significance of co-ordinated development in both the social and the economic spheres of the national life, Nepal has also vigorously embarked upon a programme of social reform of far-reaching consequences. The recent revision and modernization of the Code of Laws has introduced revolutionary changes in our social structure — a task that has been achieved over centuries and only after bloodshed in several progressive countries of the world. These laws are aimed at guaranteeing fundamental human rights to all, irrespective of race, sex, caste or religion, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
123.	In keeping with these efforts to eradicate social inequalities, His Majesty's Government has launched an equally vigorous programme for eliminating sources of economic inequality as well as for creating opportunities for economic advancement for all. The most significant step in this direction has been the land reform programme, under which ceilings on land- holdings have been fixed for different parts of the country. Also tenancy rights have been effectively secured for tenant farmers throughout the country. Land reform in a predominantly agricultural country like Nepal is bound to have a lasting effect in both the economic and the social structure of the country. This revolution is being quietly achieved in Nepal today.
124.	Whereas we in Nepal feel confident about the success of our efforts in economic and social development, we also realize, like the rest of the developing world, that our fate is greatly affected by economic forces in the rest of the world. It was with a keen realization of this fact that my Government participated in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held this year.
125.	The conference was a right step towards the solution of the grave problem of the economic gap between the rich countries and the poor countries of the world. It provided a great forum to review this serious and threatening problem, and recommended measures to overcome the difficulties faced by the developing countries in meeting their trade gap. Though the conference could not produce immediate practical results, it evolved certain dynamic principles of international trade, including transit trade of the landlocked countries. If those principles and recommendations were to be faithfully implemented, many of the economic ills faced by the developing countries would be to a great extent solved.
126.	My delegation is hopeful that the continuing machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, as envisaged in the Trade and Development Board, will pursue the issue posed at the conference and ultimately solve them, thereby helping the developing countries to attain a desirable rate of growth, so that an integrated world economy may be achieved.
127.	At this point, I would like to stress that, in considering the report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, special consideration should be shown to the problems of the countries at lower stages of development. Those countries, including the developing land-locked countries like my own, constitute areas of great economic depression. Such countries would benefit very little even if preferences were accorded by the developed countries to the developing world, unless additional measures were taken to deal with their special problems.
128.	In this connexion, I am happy to note that the committee of twenty-four appointed by the Secretary- General to prepare a draft convention relating to transit trade of land-locked countries will be able to recommend to the future conference of plenipotentiaries a draft convention for its consideration and adoption. The question of free and unrestricted transit of the land-locked countries received due attention at the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Cairo, in October 1964, which also recommended convening the conference of plenipotentiaries early in 1965. When finally adopted, this convention will prove a great step forward in international relations, facilitating the understanding of the economic problems and juridical rights of smaller and weaker States.
129.	Among the various problems that are faced by our Organization, only a few of which have been touched upon by me, the most immediate one facing us is that of the financial health of the United Nations. The financial deficit faced by the Organization, as we all are so well aware, has resulted from its inability so far to find a satisfactory formula for the financing of peace-keeping operations undertaken by it. At the root of this failure to arrive at a satisfactory solution of the problem is, of course, the divergence of opinion among the great Powers regarding the authority of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
130.	The crisis that is at present faced by the United Nations, therefore, goes deeper than restoring the financial health of the Organization, which of course can also not be ignored as if it did not exist at all. The financial deficit is real, and hard money will be needed to remove the prospects of financial bankruptcy faced by the Organization. But the constitutional crisis or the political crisis faced by the Organization in its nineteenth year is much more serious and of graver concern to all of us. Its outcome is fraught with far-reaching consequences for the future effectiveness of the Organization.
131.	It is the gravity of this problem that I am sure has impressed us all, and has continuously impelled us to try to find acceptable ways and means that will preserve the Organization rather than launch it on a slow process of disintegration by weakening it, At stake are serious issues that effect not only the big Powers but the rest of the membership, which has an equal or perhaps a greater stake in the preservation and strengthening of the Organization. My delegation sincerely hopes that the negotiations that are still in progress will bear positive results in a manner that will strengthen rather than weaken the Organization, in consonance with the principle of collective responsibility for peace-keeping operations as laid down in the Charter.