191.	Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to extend to you personally, and on behalf of the delegation of Saudi Arabia, our warmest congratulations on the occasion of your unanimous election to the office of President of the General Assembly at its nineteenth session. I am confident that your long experience and profound perception of the intricate problems in the field of international relations admirably qualify you for this high office. We sincerely hope that the tasks assigned to this General Assembly will be carried to a successful conclusion under your guidance and wise leadership.
192.	Your election, Sir, should also. be looked upon as an honour bestowed by the world community on the continent of Africa. Knowing you as we do, let us at the same time hope that those parts of Africa still under the colonial yoke will soon be liberated, and as free countries occupy their rightful seats in the United Nations.
193.	At this juncture, it also gives me great pleasure, personally and on behalf of my delegation, to express our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General and his able assistants for their commendable and untiring efforts for the maintenance of international peace and security. The dedication of U Thant to this Organization has, indeed, become proverbial, and we all wish him the best of health so that we may continue to benefit from his wise counsel and tactful handling of problems which, time and again, have been entrusted to him by this Organization.
194.	On reviewing the agenda of this session, it becomes quite evident that the General Assembly is still preoccupied with practically the same issues, year after year. However, the few items that have added should be of the utmost concern to the majority of people the world over. I may cite such issues as disarmament, the limitation of nuclear weapons and their spread among, more nations, and, nonetheless, the urgent need for States to settle their disputes by peaceful means. I do trust that the General Assembly will, during this session, take positive decisions for the solution of these problems, especially those relating to disarmament and the spread of nuclear weapons, so that fear may be dispelled and tension lessened amongst peoples and nations everywhere.
195.	In spite of its multifarious items, the agenda of the nineteenth session seems to us to concentrate on three main objectives: disarmament, decolonization, and promotion of economic and social development.
196.	It is unfortunate that negotiations on disarmament have so far not advanced beyond the conclusion of the 1963 Moscow agreement pertaining to partial nuclear testing. The peoples of the world have since hoped that the three Powers which signed the Moscow Agreement would take wider and more effective steps to attain complete and general disarmament. We still entertain the hope that the Geneva negotiations will be resumed and that an agreement will be reached paving the way for co-operation, peace and security amongst all nations.
197.	As for colonialism, in spite of the great efforts made for its eradication, and the fact that an additional number of African States have achieved independence since the last session, we find it is still tenacious in a number of regions of the world, and particularly in Africa—all this in contravention of the United Nations resolutions and despite the clamour of peoples still bent on their struggle for independence.
198.	Whilst we warmly welcome the new States of Malawi, Malta and Zambia to the family of the United Nations, we should not overlook the fact that there are regions in the Arabian peninsula located in its southern and eastern parts where the people are not totally free, in spite of their unmistakable aspirations to achieve full independence.
199.	The struggle of the people of Oman and those inhabiting the southern regions of the Arabian peninsula are striking examples of a new brand of colonialism with which the United Nations presently finds itself engrossed.
200.	We do hereby reaffirm that the Government and people of Saudi Arabia stand firm in upholding the United Nations Charter, which guarantees to all peoples and nations the right to determine their own destiny.
201.	It is most unfortunate that the General Assembly should convene during this session in the wake of the tragedy caused by the latest Israel armed aggression against the peaceful inhabitants of Syrian villages along the armistice line. The ruthless and wanton attacks carried out by the aggressors resulted in the death of innocent people, including women and children. The atrocious air attack on these villages should leave no doubt in the minds of Member States that the Israelis have engaged in premeditated and unprovoked aggression.
202.	I would fail in my duty before this Assembly were I not to mention that the frequent armed aggressions committed by Israel against neighbouring Arab States can only multiply the deep wounds inflicted on our Arab brethren. Nor should I forget that Palestine was brutally wrested from the heart of the Arab homeland.
203.	Israel is not only content to commit such acts, but is becoming increasingly defiant in its attitude towards the United Nations resolutions, whether adopted by the Security Council or the General Assembly, on the Palestine question.
204.	If the main objective of the United Nations is to preserve international peace and security, and to see to it that human rights should be observed; if, furthermore, the objective of the United Nations is to defend the high principles and lofty purposes of the United Nations Charter, would it not be appropriate to ask by what right is one permitted to uproot a people from their own homeland so as to make room for another people to replace them? All this happened in Palestine under the aegis of the United Nations.
205.	The people of Saudi Arabia cannot divest themselves of the Palestine problem. The whole world knows that until 1948 the overwhelming majority of the native population of Palestine was Arab, with a maximum of 50,000 to 60,000 native Jews. Where are the people constituting this overwhelming majority now? They were expelled by force and intimidation, and driven out of their own country on the grounds that over 2,000 years ago there were Jews in Palestine.
206.	I submit that the bulk of these Zionists had nationally — I repeat, "nationally" — belonged to countries of Eastern and Central Europe. The fact that the Zionists are followers of a Semitic religion does not bestow upon them the right to occupy Palestine, any more than it would for any alien Christians or Muslims who, as you all know, are adherents of the other two Semitic religions.
207.	The true Semites are the Arabs and the original Jews who lived amongst them centuries ago, and not the Zionists — many of whom are of dubious racial origin. Whether Christian or Muslim, the Arab Semites have always been known for their tolerance towards the Jew as such, who was never molested on the grounds of his religion. On the contrary, many native Jews rose to the highest posts, and others were held in high esteem during the zenith of Arab power, not only in the Middle East but also in the Iberian peninsula and elsewhere.
208.	Who, then, are these Zionists, who have flocked into Palestine during the last forty-five years? On the whole, they were Jews belonging to various nationalities, who had lived after the diaspora in many parts of the world. Those who lived in Central Europe were, unfortunately, persecuted by Nazis like other teeming millions of non-Jews, or gentiles as they are called. No one should condone persecution, whoever its victims might be. It was before the advent of Hitler, by about half a century, that the Zionist leaders, a handful in those days, began to dream only of a Jewish National Home, and not a State in which they would identify themselves by promoting a Jewish culture and a Jewish way of life. There was nothing wrong in such a plan so long as it was not carried out at somebody else's expense. But this is actually what has happened.
209.	The beautiful Zionist dream became a nightmare to the native people of Palestine when some major Powers abetted in establishing a Zionist State in their homeland at their expense. What happened in 1947 and 1948 in Palestine need not be related now in this Assembly. The records of the United Nations speak for themselves. Suffice it to say that injustice has been perpetrated on the people of Palestine, and their right of self-determination has been completely violated. More than one million Palestinian refugees now live on a pittance in camps around the fringe of the usurper State, whilst the fruits of their orchards and the comforts of their homes are being enjoyed by the invader.
210.	The people of Saudi Arabia cannot condone such injustice. This is only a glimpse of the intense Palestine tragedy. Whilst our Palestinian brothers will always sadly preoccupy our minds and hearts until their return to their native soil, we are gratified to recall before this Assembly the resolution adopted on the Palestine problem by forty-seven African and Asian States that participated in the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Cairo between 5 and 10 October 1964. Other colleagues have referred from this rostrum to the salient provisions of the said resolution, and therefore I need not burden this Assembly by repeating what has already been mentioned.
211.	Saudi Arabia wants peace in the Middle East, not temporary peace but everlasting peace based on justice and the right of self-determination.
212.	Whilst the Universal Declaration on Human Rights is proclaimed and celebrated annually all over the world, there are still some States amongst us, Members of this Organization, which still practise racial discrimination and have promulgated laws ensuring the rule of a white minority over the coloured majority. If this is not a flagrant violation of a fundamental human right, I wonder what would be.
213.	Before touching upon the social and economic development witnessed in Saudi Arabia during the last few years, it behooves me to clarify the broad lines of our policies that are rooted in and intermingled with our history and religious faith. The Arabian peninsula, of which Saudi Arabia comprises the largest part, is known to have been the cradle of the Arab people since the dawn of history.
214.	Over thirteen centuries ago, a new world religion was born in ancient Mecca, which has spread to the four corners of the globe. One out of every seven people in the world today happens to be a Muslim. Islam not only sets forth articles of faith, but also prescribes a moral code for the individual. In this context of Islam, which combines lofty principles with a moral code, Saudi Arabia is an Islamic State in the full sense of the word. Its constitution is the Koran itself, which has set the foundation of a way of life. This way of life for an estimated 500 million, if not more, of the world's population, has withstood the test of many centuries.
215.	There are about thirty-six Muslim nations today, twenty-eight of which are already independent Member States of the United Nations, standing witness to the vitality of Islamic faith and the wisdom of Islamic law. It would be superfluous to dwell at length upon the rich legacy of Islam to world civilization. However, I would be amiss were I to bypass the fact that mercy and compassion, charity and peace and the commonweal of all mankind are essentials of the Islamic faith.
216.	All this explains why Saudi Arabia is not merely a national State; it is also a spiritual home for every Muslim, irrespective of race or colour, who turns his face in prayer towards Mecca, to which millions upon millions of pilgrims have devoutly flocked throughout the ages, bound together by universal brotherhood. No wonder that Saudi Arabia need not explore all kinds of benefits that may be derived from various modern ideologies; for Islam, if practised rightly, has proved to encompass all these benefits and many more not provided for by such ideologies.
217.	In the economic field, I may state that in our view the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held last spring at Geneva may be considered as a forward step towards the discussion of those problems confronting the developing countries. That conference was also a step forward towards finding remedial means to various economic ills. We do hope that the recommendations adopted at Geneva will find a ready response from the industrialized nations which were participants in that conference. It is also fitting to laud the efforts of the Secretary-General and members of the Secretariat who made the necessary arrangements for assuring its success.
218.	My country is pushing forward along the road of economic and social development in all its phases. We have already accomplished a lot in various fields of economic endeavours within a relatively short period of time, despite the hindrances with which our country was at one time confronted. It is the firm resolve of the Government of His Majesty, King Faisal, in our new era to ensure the realization of the people’s welfare and prosperity.
219.	The various United Nations reports attest to the concrete social progress and economic development which the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has achieved in a short period of time. These reports also contain a reference to the sizable economic projects which are in the process of being launched. An analysis of the schedules of my country's national budget — which is on the increase year after year — shows clearly to what extent those responsible in my Government are bending their energies to promote all kinds of constructive programmes, whether in the social and economic field or that pertaining to public health, education and culture.
220.	In effect, we are endeavouring to turn over a new page in this ancient land of ours. Our efforts are being' redoubled to develop and reinforce our young State and to help its citizens, not only to be proud of their glorious past, but also to see to it that their country occupies a worthy place in the community of modern nations.
221.	Consequently, it is our intention to continue to co-operate with other States, bearing in mind that we have no ambitions or aims to interfere in the domestic affairs of any nation. And if, as sometimes happens, different political principles, currents and trends are in conflict outside our own country, our only aspiration would still be to lead a dignified life in harmony with all those who manifest the same feelings of goodwill towards us. I can do no better than to quote from a speech made by His Majesty, King Faisal, in clarifying our policy. Addressing the Saudi people, His Majesty said: "Brothers, this State was built on strong foundations. Firstly, it was built on the foundation of Islam.. Secondly, on the foundation of administering and spreading justice among citizens whereby king and citizen stand on an equal footing before the law. Thirdly, on the foundation of making education available to all and raising the country to a proper standard of living."
222.	Schools are at present being opened at the rate of one every three days all over the country. Education at all levels is entirely free. Generous scholarships are awarded to deserving students to enable them to specialize abroad when necessary. Free medical treatment is provided without exception to all our citizens. Our social security law provides a decent living for every citizen. These are only a few of the reforms which have been accomplished in recent years.
223.	Before concluding, may I be allowed to summarize the general principles on which my country's policy is based for the attainment of world peace: first, complete and general disarmament under effective international control, banning the use of the atom except for peaceful purposes, aiming at the welfare of mankind; secondly, complete liquidation of colonialism in all its forms the world over; thirdly, the adoption of all effective measures for ensuring the elimination of racial discrimination in all its forms; fourthly, solution of international conflicts by peaceful means, based on right and justice; fifthly, support for the people of Palestine in their struggle to regain their rights in their homeland, thereby enabling them to exercise their right to self-determination, inasmuch as we support any people, anywhere, struggling to liberate themselves from foreign domination; sixthly, exertion of all efforts to raise the social and economic standard of all nations.
224.	My country enjoys political stability and high economic growth, which we believe are essential for the welfare and progress of our people and all mankind.
225.	It is in the spirit of brotherhood that we extend our hand to all peace-loving nations in the world.