The Liberian delegation wishes to associate itself in the tribute and respect given by other delegations this morning to a great world character, Mr. Fiorello La Guardia.
I bring to this Assembly greetings from His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Liberia,
In the month of July, Liberia celebrated its first century of independent government with pride and grateful recognition, and with the acknowledgment of the countless blessings which have been bestowed upon the Government by Almighty God, whose sustaining and all-protecting might assisted us in maintaining our national existence amidst terrible odds and vicissitudes.
Liberia proclaims and reaffirms its deep sense of gratitude to the forebears who framed, adopted, and gave it a democratic constitution which ensures to all within its borders the natural, inherent and inalienable rights vouchsafed by it. Liberia has learned to believe in the interdependence of nations as of individuals, and that this is essential and indispensable to security, world peace and prosperity. It recognizes its international obligations and acknowledges as well as esteems the bonds of mutual friendship and reciprocal cordiality which exist between the Government and peoples of friendly States. Liberia, like other States, looks to the General Assembly to take action to create and maintain a stable and just peace throughout the world.
We have always responded to and participated in the organizations of the world that worked towards the betterment of humanity, because it is traditional with Africans, and Liberians in particular, to be friendly. We feel that the spirit of peace and harmony should characterize our dealings with each other in order to ensure confidence among nations.
Unfortunately, at this time, almost two years after the cessation of hostilities, we do not seem to be conscious of the great devastation that befell mankind, and there seems to be no unanimity of action with regard to tackling the problems which face us. If we wish to avoid another calamity in our time, it is highly necessary that nations which have the power and the resources should come to an amicable understanding for the good of the peoples of the world.
The Liberian delegation realizes that the fundamental questions which appear on the agenda will have to be solved at this second session of the General Assembly, and we hope that just and amicable solutions will be found to better the conditions of this changing world as well as to satisfy the wants and guarantee the freedom of the peoples of the-world.
Our people have been greatly perturbed over the frustrations and disillusions which have arisen within the past eighteen months, and they are hopeful that this second session of the General Assembly will grapple with the problems which are facing us and that we shall in every instance consider the lofty principles of human rights enunciated by the Atlantic Charter and elaborated in the great charter of peace upon which this Organization is founded.
We have listened attentively to the speeches of the other delegations, and our delegation cannot but join with those who have called attention to the evils which might arise if the power of the veto is abused, as most nations think has happened in the past meetings of the Security Council. We think that the time has come to reconsider what can be done to discontinue this form of abuse.
The Liberian delegation is particularly concerned over the plight of the dependent peoples of the world, their rights and their privileges, for along with the political and economic problems of the world we have yet to solve the problem of education and independence for over half of the population of the world. A solution can be found, and it must be found, for the voices of these peoples are clamouring for education and independence, and until it is found there can be no just and lasting peace.
Liberians know what it is to have a government of their own, for throughout its short history of only one century, Liberia has had to maintain and preserve itself by undaunted perseverance, intrepidity, ceaseless labour, privations and supreme sacrifices. It has known at times friendly attitudes and assistance from a few friendly States, but it has ever upheld the common cause of democratic liberty and equality in every administration of government.
The delegation of Liberia hopes that the problems which are before us will be faced with resoluteness and determination to give of our best unselfishly, so that we can promote the general welfare of the peoples of the world, so that the blessings of liberty can come to those who are yet in bondage, and these blessings can remain for their posterity.
Let us dedicate ourselves to remove selfishness, pride, and selfish sovereignty; let us make intercession for guidance and assistance through the future, so that we may see in our lifetime peoples of all races and colours living in a world of peace, of plenty and of security.