The eyes of the world are focused upon us today, the result of the many grave problems with which we are dealing and of the unhappiness and instability the world is facing at the present time. Since the Charter was signed, we have been fully conscious of the fact that we would have to solve complicated problems which are certainly in no way lesser serious than war itself. Nevertheless; we have confidence that an organization such as ours, which embodies the greatest spirits of the world and where eminent statesmen are seated, will certainly find solutions to all the political, economic and social crises which arise. Those forces which vanquished the, enemy should certainly be in a position to overcome these difficulties. Let it be understood, however, that this is upon the condition that these forces remain united and that they be guided by good intentions. It is for this reason that the Arab world still has faith in this Organization, and it hopes that the United Nations will be able to find a solution and prove to the world that this is an Organization worthy of the confidence which the world has placed in it. The Arab world also believes that those who are shouldering the burden of securing world peace are worthy of this confidence.
We are faced at this session with many complex problems the solution of which requires concerted and unremitting efforts. One of these problems is the Palestine question, which in reality is the problem of all the Arabs. In fact, it is the problem of the Middle East. It is upon the solution of this problem that peace in that part of the world will depend. Saudi Arabia has complete faith that this Organization will give the Palestine question all the study and attention it merits without being influenced by the opinion of a committee or that of any individual country.
We had hoped that the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Marshall, would not have been so hasty in expressing his views on this problem until such time as the First Committee had occasion to meet and discuss all its phases.
We had expected the United States Government and its representative to take a neutral stand prior to the meeting of the Committee. Unfortunately, he impetuously expressed his views before the other representatives had time to form an opinion based on extensive research and careful study. I do not have the least doubt that this Assembly will uphold right and justice and never permit aid to be extended to the aggressors.
The Arabs do not wish to encroach upon the rights of anyone, nor do they wish to attack any country. What they are seeking is to live in peace and harmony in their own country and thus be enabled to devote themselves to the betterment of their condition. But, at the same time, they desire to defend themselves and their country against people who have been forced upon them.
The Arabs were protectors of the Jews at a time when the Jews were persecuted all over the world, especially in Europe. But today the Arabs wish to repel the aggression of a political minority group, namely, the Zionists, It is a group which does not represent world Jewry. It is a group which is more political than religious, a group whose ways and methods are not different from those of the nazis.
The League of Nations is dead, and dead also are the treaties that were concluded during its short life. The boundaries in Europe have been completely changed. Why, then, should the vestiges of the League be maintained in Palestine?
We firmly believe that right still has supporters and that this Organization will not readopt the unjustified resolution which was adopted by the League of Nations. We furthermore believe that there still exist people of integrity and high thinking who will have the courage not to be influenced by the words of General Marshall.
We shall face the Committee with the belief that, with God’s help, right and justice will prevail.
May the peace and mercy of God be upon you.