We have hardly reached the second anniversary of the inception of the United Nations and already its highest deliberative body has assembled for the fourth time to expedite the creation of the new world of peace and co-operation referred to by the San Francisco Charter. The tasks performed since then by the various bodies of the Organization have been many and fruitful, so that it may be said that the United Nations has passed the organizational stage and reached a maturity which qualifies it to perform its precise mission of promoting the political, economic, social and cultural welfare of all peoples.
The information contained in the report submitted to this Assembly by the Secretary-General, Mr. Trygve Lie, is the most eloquent proof of the progress achieved through this Organization in constructive internationalism.
The General Assembly has considered many difficult matters and, for the first time, it held a special session on the Palestine question. Its recommendations have not remained purely theoretical, for some of them have already resulted in the creation of new organs of co-operation necessary for solving the urgent problems of the time, such as that of refugees and displaced persons.
The recommendations regarding the establishment of the Atomic Energy Commission, disarmament, the regulation and reduction of armaments, the application of the unanimity rule provided for in Article 27 of the Charter, the reconstruction of devastated areas, the development and codification of international law and so many others of which you are aware, are of vital importance. In the course of its discussions the Assembly has applied the principle of the sovereign equality of all nations, and its moral authority has been recognized in such a manner as to permit full, free and objective discussion, in an atmosphere that has oriented public opinion and often facilitated the success of negotiations.
The Economic and Social Council has completed very important preparatory work and has started resolutely to exercise the functions assigned to it by the Charter, with a view to abolishing poverty and ensuring standards of living compatible with human dignity, which is the essential heritage of all mankind.
The Trusteeship Council which was set up at the end of last year has initiated a system of guaranteeing the progressive development of non-self- governing peoples towards self-government and independence.
Finally, the Security Council has been one of the most active bodies of the Organization; the record of its work is favourable if we do not consider exclusively the difficulties raised by the application of the unanimity rule, but remember the adverse circumstances in which its discussions have taken place. Although it has not achieved satisfactory results in certain grave and complex problems, owing to disagreement among its members, it has nevertheless examined and successfully solved other questions. It is to be hoped that it may achieve real success in its mission if all the permanent members convince themselves of the inevitable need for mutual understanding as an indispensable basis for the establishment and maintenance of peace.
The aggregate of this work signifies notable progress in relations between States and even if, in many cases, there have been certain defects in the methods followed, duplication of work and insufficient co-ordination of activities — due to the extremely rapid growth of the Organization — what has been achieved up to now nevertheless gives promise for the future of the United Nations, and demonstrates the possibilities it offers to all peoples to contribute to the firm establishment of international harmony.
However, we must recognize the present difficulties. The deterioration of economic conditions in which the world is struggling, the obstacles which we have faced and still face with regard to the liquidation of the consequences of the Second World War by means of equitable peace treaties, the limitations and delays which have impeded the work of some of the organs of the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, the lack of agreement among the great Powers regarding the solution of the fundamental problems of today, have created an atmosphere of unrest which we all feel. These circumstances, reflected in the large number of items on the agenda of this Assembly, on some of which there are major differences of opinion among the permanent members of the Security Council, again put to the test the effectiveness of the Assembly and have helped create the impression that it will not be able to solve these problems.
The much debated question of revising the United Nations Charter in order to abolish or limit the veto power, is once again under discussion. Last year the Venezuelan delegation clearly defined its position in this respect. Our country supports with unshakable determination the principle of the sovereign equality of all nations, which is not compatible with the privilege granted to the permanent members of the Security Council under Article 27 of the Charter. We recognize that the application of this Article has raised serious difficulties in the Council and, in some cases, impaired its authority and the prestige of the Organization, but we realize that amendments to the Charter take effect only after ratification by all the permanent members of the Council. Thus, if it were decided to abolish the veto in accordance with constitutional procedure, such a reform could not take effect if even one of the permanent members failed to support it. The trend of opinion against the veto is stronger this year than last, but all the great Powers do not yet seem prepared to waive their privilege.
Our delegation will therefore support practical measures likely to define the meaning of the unanimity rule and to prevent the improper use of the right it grants, in the hope that political conditions will develop in a manner favourable to the improvement of the juridical structure of United Nations.
As regards the admission of new Members, Venezuela maintains that a more liberal view of applications should be taken and that we should never forget the principle of universality as the basis of our Organization, which should comprise all peace-loving States which accept the obligations contained in the Charter, and, in the judgment of the Organization, are able and willing to carry out these obligations. In this connexion, the Venezuelan delegation wishes to state that it particularly favours the admission of Italy to membership in the United Nations, not only because of the friendship that exists between the Italian people and ours, whose feelings towards Italy are faithfully reproduced in a recent resolution of the National Constituent Assembly, but also because Italy will thus be afforded an opportunity to contribute its valuable co-operation and, at the proper time, to obtain the aid required for its industrial recovery and the re-establishment of domestic peace.
Assembly and of the efforts to implement the general policy thus laid down, it is obvious that the results obtained in this matter, which more urgently requires solution than any other, are scarcely satisfactory. At this time of economic poverty, it is essential that our various national resources should not be diverted towards an armaments race, which would be dangerous in any case; they should be devoted, as far as possible, to the relief of human needs, so as to achieve true security and the real enjoyment of freedom. Another urgent task is the liberation of all peoples from the fear created by the possible use of atomic energy for purposes of war. Faithful to the peaceful tradition of the Venezuelan nation, we therefore urge the great Powers to make every effort to reach an understanding among themselves, so as to give adequate implementation to the mandate of the Assembly.
The items on the agenda relating to the Balkan and the Palestine questions will also be the subject of controversy. Both questions have delicate aspects and require exhaustive examination. On the skill with which this examination is conducted and on the observance of the fundamental principles of the Charter, will depend the discovery of a formula for the re-establishment of peace and good relations between Greece and its northern neighbours, as well as the establishment of a basis for the greatest possible measure of agreement between the parties directly interested in the problem of the Holy Land. The best method of dealing with the Spanish question can similarly be found, if the interests of the United Nations are borne in mind. Venezuela takes this opportunity to reaffirm her policy of repudiating the Franco regime.
In addition to all these questions, there is one of a different character on which our delegation wishes to place special emphasis. I refer to the continued increase in the Organization’s expenses, which is partly due to the general tendency to set up new subsidiary groups, committees, sub-committees and working groups, without adequate preparation of the plans necessary to avoid useless duplication of work and the excessive bureaucratic expansion it entails, and without considering that less urgent or secondary questions can be dealt with later. Excessive expansion of the administrative budget affects all countries, but places the small countries in a particularly difficult position, both on account of their present economic weakness and the difficulty of obtaining foreign exchange. It is therefore desirable to exercise moderation in undertakings involving large expenditure on services that are not absolutely necessary. This does not mean that we should practice a policy of rigid economy, for that would hamper the Organization in every way, but expenditure should be considered in the light of the usefulness of the services provided.
Under Article 1 of the San Francisco Charter, this Organization should be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of common ends which include the following: to develop friendly relations among nations; to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace. On this occasion, the General Assembly bears the grave responsibility of faithfully observing these basic principles in order to preserve the faith placed in the United Nations.
We well know that the Assembly cannot assume executive powers that have not been vested in it, but let us remember that as the supreme deliberative body of the Organization, it has great power to mobilize world opinion and exert a salutary influence on Governments. It is empowered to examine the grave problems on the agenda.
Let us, therefore, play our full part to achieve the reconciliation of conflicting opinions, the subordination of national interests to the higher interests of the international community, tolerance, mutual understanding and confidence and the acceptance of the method of compromise. In a word, let us demonstrate the ability of this Assembly to deal satisfactorily with the situations likely to hamper the welfare and security of nations, in the conviction that we shall thus strengthen the authority and prestige of the Organization and render an inestimable service to the cause of peace.