The delegation of Argentina has come to the sixth session of the General Assembly fully aware of the times through which we are passing. At this time, and in the face of the anxiety now besetting man, we in this hapless generation can truthfully repeat that we do not know whether we are treading on fertile or on barren ground.
2.	The harmony which reigned between the United Nations at San Francisco was fleeting. While the peoples of the world were still suffering from the consequences of the Second World War, the so-called “cold war” began. The expression was somewhat picturesque and passed into popular parlance, but to responsible minds with any kind of intuition the adjective did not obscure the stark fact of real war, for that was actually the issue — war under another guise; that disturbed the main organs of this international institution, and the deep differences of opinion paralysed any constructive effort. Those were the facts; the rest was mere words.
3.	What happened in political affairs? There the impact of this collision was reflected in the failure of efforts to give effect to Article 43 and related Articles of the Charter which form the basis of the system of collective security contemplated at San Francisco.
4.	We have also seen what happened to disarmament. The optimistic hopes entertained at the beginning of this session were dimmed as soon as the general debate got under way, because without the necessary fundamental understanding between the opposing camps it will be difficult for the General Assembly to find a solution in accordance with Article 11 of the Charter.
5.	Korea added to the complexities of a situation which was already difficult enough and which was endangering the maintenance of peace, even though a parlous peace. The negotiations for a cease-fire, a matter which, is generally settled quickly, have been complicated by all kinds of vicissitudes and disappointments, and the situation at present is this: the war goes on, and its consequences may be disastrous for the future of mankind.
6.	Our Organization has had to deal with situations which were never envisaged at San Francisco. In order to cope with them it has had to resort to emergency measures which led to the “Uniting for peace” resolution [377 (V)] adopted at the last session of the General Assembly.
7.	Let us agree that in a divided world any solution is difficult to reach, but let us also honestly admit that the peoples are following our deliberations and rightly look to us to find the road to harmony and to set the rule of law and order above force and arbitrary methods.
8.	If we wish to follow the United Nations Charter faithfully and respect its spirit and letter, let us remember that it begins with the words “We, the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war...”
9.	If we wish to avoid the destruction of a civilization which is not only our heritage but which we also hold in trust for future generations, we cannot in this hour turn a deaf ear to the cry of millions and millions of human beings whose hopeful eyes are fastened on this Assembly.
10.	The Argentine delegation is inspired by the words of the President of our country: “Our international policy tries to serve the just cause of the-peoples”. Accordingly, Argentina’s international policy has two well-defined objectives: as regards its own problems, to subordinate everything to the supreme will of the people, and, as regards the problems of other nations, to endeavour to interpret the aspirations cherished by the peoples of the world who will be affected by the solutions proposed.
11.	We are convinced that if the peoples were to be consulted before any decision relating to international disputes was reached, peace would be assured, because no people wishes to commit aggression upon another people, and no people desires war as a solution for its problems.
12.	Faced with the perils which beset us, we are under a duty to explore every avenue and every short cut until we find an Ariadne’s thread which will lead us out of the labyrinth in which we are lost.
13.	We firmly believe that the General Assembly should take the initiative in such a delicate situation as this, without regarding itself confined to the isolated solutions which may be advanced for each of the problems brought to its notice.
14.	We are convinced that, in situations as complicated as the present, there ought to be, in addition to an analysis of each separate item, a comprehensive study having the one object of easing the present tension. All efforts will be useless if a minimum of normality is not achieved in international relations.
15.	For all these reasons we consider that, side by side with the solutions for strengthening the system of collective security, we should press for action to escape from the impasse which is fraught with grave danger for the whole of civilization.
16.	It is evident that political and economic questions are the two sides of the same problem. How can we hope to achieve international peace if we do not at the same time strengthen the domestic peace of nations? This peace can only be achieved if social justice prevails and ensures the best living conditions to peoples. So long as social justice does not prevail, whatever may be devised will be a fabric of illusions, and any remedies contrived will only be a false healing of open wounds,
17.	In this connexion I am glad to be able to tell you that my Government has carried through a policy which conforms to Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations. In promoting a higher standard of living it has eliminated the unemployment index and has guaranteed conditions of economic and social progress and development.
18.	The economic crisis which afflicts the world is caused by under-production and by the inadequate distribution of goods produced among the peoples of the world. The human element ought to receive special attention in production, because without a just and worthy remuneration the worker’s output will always be below normal. In this connexion we have worked out legislation which, based upon the principle of social justice, has abolished the exploitation of man by man. Accordingly our President, General Peron, was able to claim that in our country man has ceased to be the slave of the machine, that man is no longer a mere tool but has become a being.
19.	With the same object of social welfare, the Social Assistance Foundation has performed a great work, setting up hospitals and charitable institutions throughout the country, to the achievements of which I can point with legitimate pride.
20.	We shall therefore emphatically support the programmes for raising the standards of living of the peoples and ensuring social justice.
21.	As regards the adequate distribution of capital goods and materials, we wish to state that it is essential to satisfy the needs of the under-developed countries as a matter of the greatest urgency. The distribution of scarce materials has required the establishment of an international body, which proceeds on the basis of the share in world trade. We support the principle of total representation in international organs. We also consider that rationing plans cannot be partial and include only some of the scarce materials. Nor should international action operate to the detriment of those countries which are the suppliers of primary materials. If those nations are to regulate their export trade in accordance with the recommendations of international bodies, it is only right that a similar system should be established for their imports.
22.	We should also take precautions against the possible devaluation of funds in foreign exchange or gold which, because they could not be used for the purchase of goods, have had to be accumulated by the central banks of nations which have favourable balances of payments. The experience of the last war has taught us a lesson which should not be forgotten.
23.	In general we agree with the principles concerning land reform, referred to in resolution 401 (V) of the General Assembly and resolution 370 (XIII) of the Economic and Social Council, as an instrument of social justice and a means of ensuring a better standard of living for the peoples. The object will be to give the land to those who till the soil. In this way we shall be building the economy of one of the main sources of our wealth on solid and lasting foundations.
24.	As regards trusteeship, we shall impress upon the Administering Authorities the need to do their utmost to promote the rapid political advancement of the Trust Territories of which the Charter speaks.
25.	In the matter of administrative and budgetary policy we shall maintain the view that economies compatible with the performance of the essential services of the Organization must be made.
26.	Our Government is following with special interest the studies relating to the progressive development of international law and its codification. We believe that development should be sought step by step in keeping with the principle of recognition of the sovereignty of nations, with its corollary of non-intervention.
27.	In this great assembly of nations we note the absence of many countries whose co-operation in the task of maintaining peace would have been most desirable in these difficult times. The Argentine position in the matter of the admission of new Members is so well known to you that I need not elaborate it further. I merely wish to state that we maintain our attitude, which is based on the principle that the General Assembly is the supreme authority competent to rule on admissions. In addition, we firmly believe that the success of our Organization will depend in great measure upon its universality. Consequently we find it unjust that countries such as Italy should be absent from our deliberations. We know the qualities of the Italian people and we are convinced that their exclusion is contrary to right and justice. We are strengthened in our view by the conviction which springs from our historical link with that great nation and from the contribution which its citizens have made to the growth of our country.
28.	In this serious international situation the questions at issue are not simply material interests but, above all, spiritual values which constitute a way of life and basic principles of our civilization which are now in danger. We therefore share the view that in this respect large and small countries are on the same moral footing, and that today more than ever the voice of the weakest should be heard with the same respect and attention as that of the strongest because, in the final analysis, what we are all seeking is the establishment of the rule of law and order over force.
29.	For this purpose, it would perhaps be advisable to consider the pressing need to set up a neutral group with instructions to work out the minimum conditions on which the General Assembly, in virtue of the powers conferred upon it by Chapter IV of the Charter, would make general recommendations for the improvement of the present state of affairs. The urgency of the present situation demands courage and decision on our part in facing the responsibility we have assumed towards our peoples. Let us hope that this debate will bring forth ideas that will lead to the improvement of the international situation.
30.	So we come to the Assembly animated by the earnest desire to find ways of improving the relations between Member States. As regards continental relations we are united to our brothers in America by the undertakings we have entered into and, more than that, by the bonds of affection deriving from our common origin. This close spiritual brotherhood is what leads us forward in America along a common path.
31.	Argentina, as a Member of the United Nations and on the basis of the Charter, is guided, as our President has said, by the traditional desire of its people to settle international disputes by pacific means and by respect for equality between individuals and for the sovereignty of the State; we affirm our will to social justice, our repudiation of any form of hegemony, our belief in democratic ideals and in the principle of non-intervention in the domestic affairs of States.
32.	We are convinced that only on those principles, which are the basis of our Organization, can a better world be built, a world in which there will be no privileges of any kind, either for nations or for States.
33.	In this two-thousand-year-old city, gracious host; to this sixth session of the Assembly, steeped in the spirit of the great minds that have illumined the history of culture, I express my hopes that their light may shine today upon the path of men.
