The great enterprise which must be present in the minds of all representatives at the beginning of each session of the General Assembly of the United Nations compels me, at the risk of repetition, to express before this world gathering my uncompromising loyalty to those principles which inspire in us a broader patriotism and a deeper sense of world unity.
48.	Notwithstanding the fearful character and magnitude of recent events and the impenetrable clouds which obscure the world picture, there persists the consoling belief that present conditions may constitute a terrible problem of disequilibrium, but not one of regression. “Ideals in politics are never realized, but the pursuit of them determines history", said Lord Acton, the great British philosopher.
49.	For us of the New World who have come today to this City of Light, animated by the best intentions and guided by the most generous instincts to offer up our contribution on the altars of peace, this is also a propitious moment to pay a warm tribute to the spirit of France which has influenced the culture of so many nations, France, which has succeeded in surviving bitter distress with fortitude, has displayed the most serene heroism and achieved the most brilliant victories.
50.	While I am referring to France, it seems to be appropriate to mention another State which also belongs to the same illustrious race whose age-long tradition still has much to teach the present day. I wish to say now that it will be the aim of my delegation to use its best efforts to help Italy to regain, through the proper organs and methods, full legal equality in the international sphere. I am sure that it is in the real interest of all to offer enthusiastic support to any attempt to ensure that the undying and incomparable culture and Latin soul of Italy should display themselves with renewed vigour.
51.	As early as September 1947, in the General Committee of the Assembly, during the discussion on the inclusion of supplementary items in the agenda of the second session of the General Assembly, Honduras, Argentina and Ecuador, being convinced that the United Nations was capable of a magnificent future, appealed to the good and noble sentiments of the great Powers which had signed the Treaty of Peace with Italy and invited them to give that country an opportunity of submitting its own further observations and suggestions for alleviating the burdens placed upon it by that treaty. I took the liberty of saying at the time that it would be an irreparable catastrophe if that great people, the guardian of the noblest treasures of the spirit, was to be permanently hampered by certain clauses in the treaty. As representative of Honduras, I expressed on that occasion my fears that the treaty might result in perpetuating poverty and despair among the Italian masses. At the same time, I meant no disrespect to those whom I had seen suffer the tragic consequences of a regime blinded by pride.
52.	The only motive of the then Government of Honduras and of the present Government was a sentimental and idealistic one. Today, even more than ever, it is time to set aside any thought of mere reprisals or attitudes resulting from secret political calculations.
53.	We believe that the tremendous evolution imposed on us by events and the vicissitudes common to all human tasks will accustom us to the idea of seeking solutions which are more in accordance with hard facts.
54.	May I take the liberty of extending here a hearty welcome to Mr. Anthony Eden, one of the outstanding architects of the United Nations, and quote a saying of his which is relevant to the problem with which I am concerned today : “ In my experience of international affairs it is the human factor, as expressed in the policy of governments, and not the mechanical shortcomings, that has caused our failures”.
55,	We have had many opportunities of learning and realizing fully that, without violating the fundamental principles of our Charter, it will always be open to us to make a fruitful and constructive demonstration of international morality and community spirit by improving legal machinery thanks to the procedures laid down in our basic statute.
56.	Some method should therefore be found of bringing Italy into the United Nations, so that by adapting policy and jurisprudence to the time and circumstances, we may give Italy and other nations an opportunity to reoccupy, in full awareness of their actions and in an atmosphere of mutual confidence and responsibility, a position from which they will be able to make more effective use of their abilities in this supreme task, which will result in the advent of greater world harmony.
57.	_ I dwell on the particular case of Italy because of the special position it occupies in respect of its foreign relations.
58. Without going into the matter very deeply, it sufficient to recall that on 2 December 1950, the General Assembly approved the Trusteeship Agreement whereby Italy, although not a Member of the United Nations, was appointed Administering Authority in the Trust Territory of Somaliland [resolution 442 (V)]. It is absolutely essential that, in order to carry out these grave responsibilities, Italy should be given the full powers granted to all Members of the United Nations.
59.	It seems to me, moreover, to be appropriate to remind the Assembly of the existence of resolution 197 A (III) of 8 December 1948, concerning the admission of new Members, in order that it should act in accordance with the advisory opinion given on 28 May 194S by the International Court of Justice, which declared that a State was not juridically entitled to make its consent to such admission dependent on conditions not expressly provided in paragraph 1 of Article 4 of the Charter.
60.	The New York Times, in commenting on the statement made on 26 September 1951 by the United States of America, France and Great Britain on the peace treaty with Italy, said : “If the Western Powers are open to criticism, it is that they waited so long ; Italy had earned her passage back a long time ago”.
61.	While I am attempting to clarify the position of the Honduras delegation in regard to individual questions, I should like to say that our efforts will, as always, be directed towards supporting those initiatives which will hasten the entry into force of a nobler code of international conduct and a more realistic understanding of collective responsibility.
62.	Since numerous aspects of the work of the United Nations are justifying our hopes that, in addition to purely technical and mechanical progress, many statesmen in the chief industrial countries will be more and more able to put forward loftier plans for the over-all economic and material advancement of the peoples, our aim will be to co-operate here to the fullest extent of our capabilities. To sum up, it is our earnest desire that the monumental work of the United Nations may be inspired in the pursuit of its aims by a new confidence in a future of greater justice and greater happiness.
