Among the items to be considered by the General Assembly at this session there are some which vitally affect the way of life in certain countries, and it might be said that all these questions have a bearing on the political and social progress of mankind as a whole. We might further claim that nations and persons have the courage to bring to the Assembly’s notice matters which, owing to their nature and magnitude, could not be raised between countries maintaining international relations without endangering friendly relations between these countries and possibly even peace itself. The mere fact that such vital and important problems can be submitted to and discussed by the Assembly, with some hope of a settlement, is in itself a great step forward. Even if immediate solutions are not reached, the fact that all of us can meet, consider, discuss and seek solutions or compromises regarding extremely delicate matters is a very important factor in the mutual goodwill of the nations.
46.	To ask the United Nations General Assembly to consider and find prompt solutions for the serious problems which are troubling certain countries and which have existed for many years is surely not the best way to facilitate the work or to enhance the prestige of the United Nations. The Assembly has not the requisite means or powers to enforce justice immediately, even where rightly demanded; but it is the only body where this justice can originate, the only one in which the peoples should place their optimistic hopes, and the only one which they should support. Nothing could be more detrimental to world peace than to inspire scepticism in the man in the street concerning our present or future work. What we actually stand for and what we hope to accomplish is being prejudiced not only by the critics who have spoken from this platform about our work and the policy and motives of the members of the Assembly; but also, paradoxical though it may seem, an equally harmful effect is caused by demands for justice that will brook no delay and by the expression of lack of faith in the United Nations’ work whenever immediate satisfaction — which we too should like to see — proves impossible.
47.	The peoples must realize that what they cannot obtain in peace they are not going to win by war. This is even truer as regards the smaller countries. Hence, our only course is to strengthen the Assembly’s hands and to enlist the public’s hope and faith in it; that is the way to strengthen this Organization and make it strong enough to operate really more effectively.
48.	Even if we do not all return home with all our demands satisfied, we must not think that this international organ has failed or that those demands have been rejected; nor should such circumstances furnish the pretext for hot-headed and pseudo-patriotic diatribes against the Assembly’s work. I would go so far as to say that to voice dissatisfaction in that way would be the best way to excite and organize disorder; and that would undoubtedly be a very serious threat to peace.
49.	A certain delegation has stated in this Assembly that the part which the United Nations Assembly can play in dealing with certain problems can only be limited and problems of such magnitude should in the first place be settled by the great Powers among themselves. In my opinion, this idea is entirely misconceived. The Uruguayan delegation is not going to fall into the error of denying the extremely important functions of the great Powers, but it would like to affirm the function which the smaller Powers can perform in this Assembly, for, in the aggregate, they comprise hundreds of millions of voices and speak for whole continents whose votes in the Assembly may be effectively felt in decisions on the problems before it. The smaller countries can act through tire United Nations Assembly in close relation to the great Powers, and even in opposition to them, and so collaborate in seeking the way to peace and strengthening it. We might say that a fundamental difference between the great Powers and the smaller countries is that the latter cannot initiate any great conflict involving the whole world; but the sufferings imposed by war fall equally upon everyone, as do economic and social disturbances. This means that peace is needed equally by all.
50.	We should not, therefore, when discussing the items on our agenda, differentiate between those which must be dealt with and solved by the great Powers and those which may require the collaboration of all countries. It is precisely in the larger disputes that the Assembly should make its views heard and the majority should be decisive. In this way we, the smaller countries, may become the best collaborators and friends of the great Powers in helping them to bear the burden and the immense responsibility of administering the political affairs which affect the whole of mankind. If disagreements and disputes exist among the great Powers and if a deadlock is reached in negotiations to ensure peace, the many small countries distributed through the world could obviously, if united, play a decisive part in keeping up a steady movement on the road towards that more lasting peace which is so much desired and hoped for by all.
51.	I think that the representatives have become aware that there is a certain amount of disappointment here at the way in which some speakers have addressed themselves not so much to the Members of this Assembly as to the public at large, which in all continents is watching what is being said and done here. It is essential that we should agree that peace is not likely to be found in the weakness of some and the violent language of others. Violence of language does not necessarily imply either reason or strength or even determination. Nobody made more violent speeches than Hitler, and yet now the German people is suffering the consequences of that language and that pride. It would be most unfortunate for the whole world if the same were to happen again.
52.	We have faith in what this Assembly is going to do, because all of us without exception can endeavour to see that reason shall prevail and guide the work upon which we are employed. We are sure that the world is carefully watching our efforts, we have no doubt what people want and are demanding; and we are confident that we are not going to disappoint their hopes, because all of us here present have been delegated from countries which desire peace and desire to live in freedom and, luckily, those of us who can make decisions without animosity, but firmly, form the majority here.
53.	Accordingly we feel bound to state that it is impossible to speak of peace without simultaneously speaking of the freedom of the peoples and of the right of free expression and free movement. The very fact that the Assembly exists means that there must be freedom. Without freedom we could not be here and without freedom we smaller countries would not be able to act, because our strength can only be the strength of our disinterested thinking and the strength of the unity of the smaller countries, all of them enjoying the rule of freedom. Freedom, then, is a fundamental condition of peace, so much so that it can be said that peace is gravely endangered unless accompanied by the freedom of the peoples and all mankind.
54.	I must also state, on behalf of my delegation, that we are approaching the study of all economic and social problems calmly, without being daunted by new methods which might be proposed, for we believe that in order to achieve human happiness, new methods must be tried, though the rule of freedom must be safeguarded so that man can express himself without tear and free from pressure.
55.	We do not believe in social improvements and technical progress that are unattainable without the surrender of the freedom of the individual and of nations. On the contrary, these merely point the way to a new form of slavery, and it would be erroneous to believe that they lead to the happiness we seek.
56.	Should the achievement of a full measure of social justice demand that we weaken our respect of freedom, we should then find ourselves in an impasse. Fortunately, however, that is an entirely false premise; the social progress of mankind, and even the rapid evolution of the actual forms of society which ensure greater justice, may be achieved without weakening or damaging freedom.
57.	Likewise, we do not believe that the world can move towards disarmament or enjoy the security of an established peace if freedom of information and freedom of movement do not exist. We claim that, so long as great zones of silence where the freedom of man is controlled or suppressed by force continue to exist, it will not be possible to ensure true disarmament. Before this Assembly can act it must be well informed, and it can never have that assurance unless freedom of information throughout the world is an accomplished fact.
58.	This Assembly might adopt a resolution demanding such freedom of information, to impress upon the man in the street that he is gravely imperilled by those who would deny him the right of acquiring information. How could we proceed to fulfil this essential condition of our way of life? The Uruguayan delegation to the Hague Conference in 1907 stated: “Since so many alliances have been made to impose arbitrary rule, it would be appropriate to conclude an alliance to impose justice”.
59.	The peoples wishing to live in freedom and sincerely working for the happiness of mankind could enter into a great alliance with a view to finding ways likely to lead to the economic well-being of nations, to a contented life in society to the satisfaction of the individual’s desire to move about freely and to be informed of the progress achieved in the world.
60.	Uruguay extols freedom because it is in freedom that democracy yields its finest fruits. It was under the protection of freedom that Uruguay won all its social victories: those connect with present and future material security as well as those which create and confirm the happy state of living in an atmosphere of intellectual and moral clarity in which no restrictions hamper the free expression of ideas.
61.	In this way, we have been able to arrive at this period of improvisation and disequilibrium with a firm and resolute step, with the aid of a far-seeing legislation worked out gradually over a long period of years. This has been our use and apprenticeship of freedom. Let me emphasize that our freedom is intended to serve the social achievements which, we have brought about. We hastened to give all men the justice they need so that they may enjoy life.
62.	Education in our country is entirely free, from the earliest schooling until the attainment of a university degree; all costs are borne by the community. Health inspection is begun in schools and assistance in the hospitals and clinics throughout the country is also extended free to those whose salaries are below a prescribed statutory average. Our system of social security is perhaps among the most perfect in the world, and the present and the future of all those who work are insured. From 1912 onwards, we have gradually nationalized the management of various sectors of our social and economic existence, converting private capital, whether national or foreign, into state capital, and these have proved decisive achievements expressing the clear victory of our way of life. As I have said, we realize that we have not yet covered all the ground before us. Let me repeat, however that we approach without apprehension any possible solutions, though, of course, we are vigilant lest we lose our freedom or show weakness to those who seek to deprive us of it on the pretext of ideal solutions, which we earnestly desire to find and which we have ardently sought in other lands, but without success. In this way, we contribute towards the strengthening of democracy and thus feel that we are loyal members of this United Nations.
63.	Our country has made every endeavour to fulfil its duties towards the United Nations and, accordingly, we have given economic assistance to the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund and have also granted, technical aid to economically under-developed countries, offering to grant fellowships for Uruguay as well as to send technical experts. We have responded to the appeal for aid to Korea with medical supplies and clothing; we have also promptly, in the name of international solidarity, heeded the call of certain countries in their time of suffering. Furthermore, our country and our Government have considered it a fundamental duty to answer every appeal made in this Assembly and we are sure that those representatives of the Organization who have visited Uruguay have been able to witness our interest in the success of the activities of the United Nations and our loyalty to its work.
64.	I should not like to leave this rostrum without referring to the need for an early solution to correct the improper use of the veto. Its effect is harmful and it is preventing certain countries from taking their place in this Assembly; on behalf of my delegation, I wish to refer particularly to Italy. All those who have had occasion to visit Italy can see the speedy recovery achieved in its whole social and economic life, its will to work and its sincere desire to establish the law and order of democracy. All this has been accomplished by a nation which desires peace; it is sound in spirit and high-minded in character and would surely prove a loyal collaborator in our work, contribute to the prestige of the Organization and strengthen our resolutions. The Italian people will never forget who is preventing it from being present and from making its voice heard here.
65.	Uruguay appears before this Assembly free of all local interests, fully disposed towards the fullest possible cooperation and offering the assurance that, so far from creating difficulties in the United Nations, it will, on the contrary, undertake to contribute to the utmost towards the effective realization of its activities. All countries, without any exception, may confidently look to us for friendship, understanding of their problems and a readiness to help in satisfying the demands of justice. However, not a single commitment and not a single word will be wrested from us which might tend to threaten the success of our struggle to strengthen the sure and effective progress of the United Nations.
