Venezuela is attending this Assembly in the spirit in which it always attends international conferences; it has come here to offer in all sincerity its co-operation to the United Nations in the tasks that lie before it and is prepared to consider fully all the views expressed in a spirit of fraternity and constructive frankness, without which nothing lasting or real can be achieved. It will, in short, unite its efforts with those being exerted here in pursuance of the ideals of our Organization, and it is prepared to concur in and support any action which will benefit the peoples of the world. Our delegation’s attitude is dictated by, and is in keeping with, the deep-rooted traditions of Venezuela and is an expression of the feelings of our countrymen.
48.	Venezuela believes in the efficacy of our system and consequently it loyally fulfils its obligations as a Member State, not only on the universal plane within the Organization, but also in its bilateral relations with other countries, since it is of opinion that only thus can the work in which we are engaged progress. It would have been useless for us to have given our support to the principles laid down in the Charter and to have subscribed to the decisions adopted by this body through its various organs if we were, in bilateral policy, to betray the ideals of the United Nations and disregard its fundamental purposes.
49.	However, our attitude is not inspired solely by the duty of remaining true to our past and to our people! we are also convinced that by nobility and sincerity of political purposes alone can peace be achieved. Systems for the prevention of war which are theoretically perfect may be put forward, but if goodwill and sincerity of purpose are absent, the time will come when all systems will fail and all methods prove ineffective, since real peace can only be attained when there is a universal conscience embodying and integrating similar ideals and consequently inspiring action of the same moral calibre.
50.	From a practical point of view, we are well aware that any system of peace which can be devised must, if it is to be effective, be able to count on the support and the goodwill of all States, and particularly of those States which bear the greatest share of, responsibility for its implementation. My delegation was therefore surprised id and disappointed to see that when the United States, France and the United Kingdom, in complete loyalty and With an unquestionable desire for harmony, presented a disarmament plan and offered genuine possibilities for understanding, a minority remained aloof from the general spirit of harmony and agreement by which almost all the countries represented here were animated, and persisted in maintaining a negative and intransigent attitude. I repeat that we were surprised and disappointed to see that when these three Powers stated, their readiness to enter immediately into negotiations within the United Nations regarding disarmament, a destructive and discordant reply was made that proposal, thus precluding any friendly understanding. As representative of Venezuela, I feel it my duty to make the voice of my country heard at this time of danger, which is also a time of hope, and to express the wish that harmony and understanding will be established on that is what our peoples ask of us and what they expect to be the outcome of our deliberations.
51.	I should like now to indicate more explicitly the position which the Venezuelan delegation will adopt in regard to some of the items on the agenda of the present session of the General Assembly.
52.	When, in July 1950, the aggression against the Korean Republic occurred, Venezuela reacted by condemning that flagrant attack, as did various other Members of the United Nations. The reasons for that reaction were obvious, since such an attack was clearly inconsistent with the purposes and principles which we accepted on signing the Charter at San Francisco. A year and a half have passed since the outbreak of hostilities. During that time much blood has been shed and, in spite of persistent efforts to restore peace in that region, war has continued with further casualties and the danger of an extension of the conflict remains. Collective security action by the Organization, which was put to the test for the first time, is evolving in Korea in a spirit of unshakable and ever-growing determination. However, this state of affairs, although inevitable for reasons of which we are all aware, is a source of constant concern to those of us who believe that the United Nations work for peace. We trust therefore that hostilities may soon end, on the understanding however that peace must be achieved under conditions of justice and that the authority of the Organization is thereby reinforced.
53.	Only an unshakable determination to repel the oppressor has made it possible for the system of co-operation, which had to be hastily improvised in Korea, to yield practical results. To that end, in order to obviate any need for improvisation in the future, the General Assembly adopted, at its fifth session, the resolution [377 (V)] entitled “Uniting for Peace”. That resolution set up the Collective Measures Committee, of which Venezuela has had the honour to be a member and whose report will be discussed in this session.
54.	Although the ideal of a universal system of collective security is one of long standing, this is certainly the first time that such a system has been worked out in detail and with the will to put it into effect. For that very reason, the report to be discussed by this Assembly will suffer from the natural imperfections characteristic of all beginnings. Collective security, if it is to be worthy of that name and if it is to function efficiently, must be based on the individual security of all those countries which are prepared to contribute to the common effort for the maintenance and restoration of peace. A country would not be working for this vital purpose if it neglected its own defence, thus creating an area readily vulnerable not only to military but also to economic aggression. Individual efforts by countries to strengthen their defences in order to contribute towards joint defence constitute one positive method of preventing the outbreak of new problems. Moreover, the aim pursued by a collective security system is primarily to discourage aggression before it occurs. In order to achieve this, it is necessary not only for all national efforts to be co-ordinated but also to ensure that no country or area may be regarded as an easy prey for a potential aggressor who would try eventually to undertake action on a more far-reaching scale. The report of the Collective Measures Committee does indeed take these circumstances into account. However, it might be desirable to state them more clearly.
55.	Of course, if an effective understanding of the proposals made regarding disarmament could be reached and if all peoples were unanimous in their will to arrive at a real plan for the realization of peace, the collective security system would then have as its basis universal co-operation in the defence of a common aim rather than the need for preventing new conflicts; it would be established in order to strengthen the Charter and give it life rather than to attempt to curb ambitions contrary to its purposes. Venezuela, then, is prepared to continue to co-operate in the effort for universal security in the same way as it has done in the regional security system of the Organization of American States, and it is sincerely gratified at having been a member of the Collective Measures Committee, whose work and whose report constitute, beyond any doubt, a step forward towards the ideal of establishing law and justice as the guiding principles of international relations.
56.	Thus also, Venezuela will continue to support the plans for developing international economic co-operation through the United Nations. Gradually but surely, the idea of interdependence has been accepted in this field: the idea that all countries, large and small, should direct their efforts towards the welfare of all nations as a whole and the recognition that the progress and development of the economic potentialities of any area of the world lead to a state of well-being and higher standards of living for all nations.
57.	The belief that freedom from social unrest and that economic welfare could exist in some countries side by side with misery and hunger in others has been strongly disproved by recent history. My country has consequently noted with particular sympathy the marked interest with which the Organization has taken up the problems of economic development. To bring to under-developed regions the capital and technical knowledge essential to them, thereby creating more favourable conditions of wealth and welfare, is not only a comprehensive and generous humanitarian task, but also enlightened and intelligent action in keeping with political and social reality.
58.	It is not yet possible to make a final appraisal of the work which the United Nations, directly or through the various specialized agencies, has been accomplishing in this field. The recent impetus given to technical assistance programmes is, nevertheless, a clear sign, auguring well for the future, of the interest with which these problems are now being considered at the present time. My country wishes to express its enthusiasm for this work of cooperation, which will form a solid foundation for the final achievement of world peace.
59.	Since the first session of the Assembly in 1946, the delegation of Venezuela has continued to maintain the principle of the universality of the Organization. Unfortunately, however, the result of the voting in the Security Council has denied the United Nations the valuable co-operation of various countries which have requested admission to the Organization. Among them, may I refer specifically to Italy, a nation with glorious traditions, whose democratic spirit today and the vigour with which it has regained its place amongst the most progressive States, make its presence within our Organization of the utmost importance. Consequently, my delegation is extremely, anxious that, at the present session, the Assembly should thoroughly study the problem of the admission of this State in order to arrive at a satisfactory solution which would put an end to this unjust situation incompatible with the interests of the Organization.
60.	Venezuela is also gratified to note the proposal of the three great Western Powers for the restoration of German unity, as it feels that the United Nations cannot remain indifferent to the fate of Germany. Morally, and in accordance with the Charter, they are interested parties in the solution of this problem. When the great Powers became responsible for the administration of Germany, they did not do so in order to keep the country divided but with the intention of re-educating it as a peace-loving State. The present situation, artificial as it is, can only be considered.as temporary; it is essential to seek a solution to put an end to it.
61.	I should not like to leave this rostrum without expressing the earnest hope of the Government of Venezuela that this Assembly may lead to the adoption of decisions for ensuring peace and bringing well-being to all countries of the world. I would also reiterate our sentiments of admiration and gratitude for the French nation, which once again has received us with its splendid and generous hospitality.
