Permit me first of all to express to Prince Wan Waithayakon in the name of the Austrian delegation cordial congratulations on his election to the Presidency of the eleventh session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
137.	It is now almost ten years since Austria applied for admission to the United Nations. There can be no doubt that this long period of waiting was caused by the tensions between East and West, by the-cold war whose fronts were spread across our country. A favourable constellation of the world political situation and the efforts of Austrian diplomacy to turn this to account finally made possible, after about 360 meetings had taken place in vain, the conclusion of the Austrian State Treaty and the re-establishment of a free and independent Austria. This event, so significant for our country, had also been taken as a symptom of relaxation of tension between the two great Power blocs, a relaxation which was, in the last analysis, the determining factor in the admission of Austria and other States to the United Nations, After almost twenty years of isolation, it is now again possible for the country on the Danube to make its voice heard in the forum of world opinion and to co-operate in the realization of the goals of this community of peoples.
138.	The long occupation to which our country had to submit prompted us to reorient our foreign policy and to formulate it with the utmost precision. During that period, it became clear to us that the removal of foreign occupation troops from Austria would be achieved only in the wake of a general international softening of antagonisms. The recognition of this fundamental truth made it clear to us that two maxims would constitute the bases of the new Austrian foreign policy: first, our neutrality, which will keep us out of any sort of military alliance; second, intensive co-operation within the framework of the international community of States, with all the means at our disposal, for the maintenance of peace. In practical application, these principles mean permanent neutrality, and at the same time dedication to active international co-operation on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations. The Austrian Parliament laid down these two principles in a solemn declaration last rear and, in its session of 26 October 1955, established the basic policy for our future relations with the rest of the world in a law in the Federal Constitution concerning Austria’s neutrality.
139.	Permit me to examine these two fundamental principles of our foreign policy more closely. Austria’s neutrality consists in the obligation never in the future to enter into any military alliances and not to permit the establishment of military bases by foreign Powers on its territory. The concept of Austrian neutrality does not include ideological ties. Neutrality binds the State only, and not the citizen. The right to free expression of opinion and freedom of the Press are guaranteed in the Austrian Constitution. The Austrian people has given clear proof during the past ten years that the principles contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are to them not merely words, but a binding obligation,
140.	Our permanent neutrality is not an international statute dictated to us from outside. It is a foreign policy chosen by the Austrian people in a free and self-reliant decision. Our neutrality is also not an end in itself, but a means to an end. This end, which was expressly adhered to in the Federal Constitutional law referred to, is the maintenance of our independence and the inviolability of our territory. The corollary of neutrality is the will to maintain it and to defend it with all available means. Our neutrality is therefore an armed neutrality. Should our freedom be attacked, we shall know how to defend Austria’s borders. Neutrality for us is dedication to law and justice, and rejection of force and violence.
141.	Participation and co-operation within the frame of the international community of States forms the second basic principle of our foreign policy. The highest goal of the United Nations is the assurance and maintenance of world peace, and the elimination of disputes likely to lead to a breach of the peace. The United Nations has done valuable work in this field. It has achieved the localization of incidents in such a way that they have not kindled a world conflagration. The stronger the authority of the United Nations becomes, the better it will be possible to preserve the peace of the world. In the political field, it is difficult to find a common denominator, to eliminate resentments held over from the past and, in spite of manifold common interests, to achieve concerted action. For this reason, the activity of the United Nations must be judged not only in the light of results obtained but in a larger perspective, and from the standpoint of what the world situation might be today if this forum had not been in existence.
142.	This year’s General Assembly of the United Nations takes place in a time significant to world history. Anxiety and fear of the demon of war have once again possessed the human race, and today the world looks to this community of nations, in which all Its hopes are placed. Will it justify the confidence of the peoples of the earth and assure and preserve peace and order, bread and work? Time presses and we must have effective actions instead of ineffective words.
143.	Austria, situated as it is in the heart of Europe, has throughout its long history regarded mediation and conciliation as its mission. We have done this again only recently. The events in Hungary led the Austrian Federal Government to appeal to the Government of the Soviet Union as early as 28 October 1956 to co-operate in ending hostilities and bloodshed. We have done this under strictest adherence to our neutrality. I should like to give special emphasis to this fact in view of allegations regarding arms shipments to Hungary. The Austrian Government has not found a single case of such shipments having crossed the Austrian border into Hungary. These and similar allegations, from whichever side they may come, must therefore be rejected as unfounded.
144.	From the very beginning we have tried to render aid to Hungary and to fulfil our humanitarian neighbourly, duties. It was for this reason that the Austrian delegation submitted on 9 November 1956 a draft resolution [A/3324] under Article 1, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which was adopted by the General Assembly, to carry out through the United Nations a large scale relief programme of providing medicine, food and clothing for the Hungarian people.
145.	The readiness to help shown by the Austrian people, the readiness to help manifested by the whole world, may serve as a reminder to the conscience of statesmen that human beings are of good will, and that it is the task of those responsible to put this will into action. Nearly 50,000 refugees from Hungary have already sought asylum in Austria, and more are arriving daily. The forced migrations of peoples during the twentieth century, which are to be ascribed to the suppression of the freedom of the individual and of whole peoples, certainly do not contribute to the honour and the good name of this so-called century of progress.
146.	Since the end of the Second World War, 800,000 refugees have crossed the Austrian borders; 130,000 of these refugees are still being cared for by the Austrian Federal Government in accordance with the Geneva Convention. For us Europeans, the tragedies of these poorest of the poor, who have lost their homes, are still very much alive in our memories. The suffering and want of these homeless people who, despairing of humanity, have wandered along the highways still weigh heavily upon us. And now thousands of human beings are again in flight into Austria.
147.	There is much eagerness to help, and I should like to thank the United Nations for its effective support. I also appeal to the members of this community of peoples to give shelter to these refugees suffering from want and hunger, to admit them without bureaucratic formalities and without first examining them for their various qualifications, and to heed no other law than that of humanity, thereby assisting Austria in discharging its heavy burden. The cost of giving adequate care to the refugees is formidable. I therefore appeal to all representatives here to urge their Governments to assist Austria in discharging this task.
148.	Austria is also dev mg great attention to events in other continents and hopes that all those responsible will translate into reality the good intentions of this world forum, will follow its advice, and will subordinate their own interests to the interests of all. All the questions disturbing the world today can be solved if the principles of the Charter of the United Nations are transformed into action, if human rights are respected, and if the right of self-determination is truly granted to the peoples. Problems of a local character between individual States should be settled by agreements in the spirit of the United Nations. Such agreements, if they are observed in letter and in spirit, will contribute to peace and will promote good relations among neighbours. By no means the least of the problems which are relevant in this context is that of the minorities.
149.	The present age has been called the age of atomic energy There can be no doubt that the release of the power of the atom contains dangers. Fortunately, in recent months it has bien possible to implement measures, within the framework of the United Nations, guaranteeing the peaceful use of this tremendous energy. I assure the Assembly that Austria will participate actively in these efforts and that Austria is prepared, in the spirit of the decision taken by the Conference on the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency held in October 1956, to facilitate in every way the establishment of the headquarters of the future International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna.
150.	On Human Rights Day, the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra — one of the oldest orchestras in the world- will give a concert in this very hall. Through that concert, Austria will give expression to its solidarity with the United Nations. We consider ourselves fortunate to be able to give that expression of solidarity in our own special language in this hall of peace. Music binds people together. May the harmony of the orchestra serve as a symbol and a guiding rule of action for the representatives of peoples, who here represent the world. It is not t by one instrument, but by all the instruments together, that unity and harmony are produced.
151.	May the representatives of peoples in the United Nations also speak a language expressing a sense of justice for all, and may the great Powers of this community be mindful of the fact that true harmony may be achieved only when all work together and that only, thus may a peaceful world be built.
