The present session of the United Nations General Assembly is being held at a time when the international situation has become serious and complex. On the one hand, the course of international events between the tenth and eleventh sessions of the Assembly was marked by a continued lessening of international tension, reflected in the progress made in a number of specific fields and in a number of concrete instances, and there were real prospects of strengthening peace throughout the world. On the other hand, there was increased activity on the part of these forces which are seeking to halt the trend of events in the direction of the strengthening of universal peace and friendly co-operation among peoples.
62.	The development of the international situation during this period has shown that there are great opportunities for further intensifying co-operation among all countries regardless of the structure of their society. There was new evidence to show that the best way of promoting co-operation and achieving progress in the solution of urgent international problems is by negotiation. In this way, during the past year, there has been a further lessening of international tension in some areas. All this constitutes a positive factor in international life and is to the advantage of the United Nations, which, as is now obvious, can play an active part in this development, provided all its activities are constantly guided by the Purposes and Principles of the Charter.
63.	Our Organization has been substantially strengthened by the admission of nineteen new Members. We sincerely welcome them into the family of the United Nations. We believe that the widening of the United Nations membership and the experience which these new countries can contribute will have a favourable effect on discussion of the very important international questions that are being dealt with by the United Nations.
64.	As a result of patient negotiations conducted in a spirit of fruitful co-operation and mutual understanding, the International Atomic Energy Agency was established, and its Statute unanimously approved. And although, alongside the good points, there are some significant shortcomings in the Statute, it does show that where the parties are of good will and united in their efforts, positive results can be achieved in solving complex questions of international co-operation.
65.	The progress made in relaxing international tension was a thorn in the flesh of those forces which, for years, have been fanning the cold war and keeping it alive, accumulating exorbitant profits from the feverish armaments race and using the threat of provoking a new world war to back their speculations.
66.	These aggressive forces unleashed an armed attack on the peace-loving Egyptian people, who had embarked on a successful struggle for their national and State independence. The open aggression committed by the United Kingdom, France and Israel against Egypt is nothing but a desperate attempt of the imperialists to halt by force the progressive decay of the colonial system and to frighten the peoples who are fighting for the right to a free life and independent development.
67.	However, imperialist attempts to halt by force the powerful and ever growing movement of national liberation are doomed to failure. The disintegration of the colonial rule of imperialism is inevitable and cannot be halted by any force in the world. Already, more than 1,200 million people in Asian and African countries have cast off the yoke of colonialism and are building a new life freely and independently, in peace and friendship with all countries.
68.	Public opinion throughout the world has taken note with great satisfaction of the cessation of hostilities in Egypt. However, the cease-fire was only the first step towards liquidating the military conflict. The immediate withdrawal of the armed forces of the aggressors from Egyptian soil is still the main requirement demanded by the peoples.
69.	In spite of the unanimous desire of all peoples, as expressed in a number of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the Governments of the United Kingdom, France and Israel have refused to withdraw their troops from Egyptian soil forthwith, and have put forward various conditions for compliance with the United Nations resolutions.
70.	Instead of leaving the country immediately, the troops of the aggressors, as we have been told by the Foreign Minister of the Egyptian Republic, are consolidating their positions on Egyptian soil and are committing atrocities in the Gaza Strip, Port Said and other towns.
71.	So long as all troops which took part in the attack on Egypt are not withdrawn, we cannot consider the aggression at an end or the possibility of a renewal and extension of the conflict entirely eliminated. The Governments of the United Kingdom, France and Israel, which have committed brutal aggression against Egypt, have no moral right whatever to impose any kind of conditions for the withdrawal of their troops.
72.	World public opinion decisively condemns the acts of the aggressors and will not permit them to achieve, by such manoeuvres, the objectives which they could not attain by direct military means.
73.	We are sorry to have heard, even in the General Assembly, voices — not many voices, perhaps, but some — which are prepared to support the manoeuvres of the aggressors.
74.	The delegations in question support the aggressors’ attempts to use the United Nations Emergency Force for the purpose of securing foreign, or “international” supervision of the Suez Canal. In that connexion, it must be emphasized that the question whether, and how long, the United Nations Emergency Force shall be stationed on Egyptian soil can be decided only in agreement with the Egyptian Government.
75.	At the same time as the forces which are hostile to peace were resorting to aggressive action in the Near East, attempts were also being made in Europe to jeopardize peace and security. In the heart of Europe, in the Hungarian People’s Republic, we witnessed for the first time since the defeat of Fascism in the Second World War an open attempt by the Fascist underground, supported from abroad, to force Hungary from the path of democratic and socialist development and to restore by terror and armed force the old Horthy regime.
76.	Czechoslovakia, as a neighbour of the Hungarian People’s Republic is directly affected by these events. Those taking part in the putsch made revanchard and revisionist claims which were directed against the security and territorial integrity of the Czechoslovak Republic, and represented a threat to peace and security throughout this part of Europe.
77.	The white terror, the horrible atrocities which the unbridled Fascists perpetrated on the peaceful population, including women and children, during the few days when they controlled the streets of Budapest and other towns, show vividly what kind of future the counter-revolutionaries envisaged for Hungary and its people. However, their aims went much farther. Their plan envisaged a victory of reaction which would drive a wedge in the brotherly relations which exist between the socialist States and would turn Hungary into an exceedingly dangerous hotbed of tension and a jumping-off ground for military adventures in Europe.
78.	The events in Hungary confirm the fact that international reaction has no desire to reconcile itself to the existence of the world socialist system and uses every opportunity to threaten the peaceful development of the socialist countries.
79.	International reaction organizes and carries out widespread subversive activities against the socialist countries, broadcasts lying propaganda by radio, releases balloons filled with slanderous booklets and leaflets designed to incite the people against their lawful Governments, and constantly seeks to create a counterrevolutionary underground in the peoples’ democracies.
80.	It can only be regretted that the United Nations, instead of emphatically opposing this type of activity by forces hostile to peace, is being used in the political interests of certain circles, for slanderous attacks on countries with a socialist system.
81.	Another example of what is being done to maintain international tension concerns the attitude to the question of the lawful representation of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations.
82.	The People’s Republic of China is playing an increasingly prominent part in the mainstream of international life. It is generally recognized today that without the participation of this mighty world Power not one of the more serious international problems, and especially no problem, affecting Asia and the Far East, can be effectively solved. The United Nations is engaged on a dangerous course when it permits the imperialist and strategic interests of a single Power to dictate to it year after year a procedure which postpones the solution of so urgent and important a question.
83.	The aggression of imperialist forces against Egypt and the war propaganda carried on in some North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries, which have again brought the danger of military conflict to the fore, have also mobilized public opinion throughout the world, and aroused insistent demands for progress on a question which is of the greatest importance to the cause of peace, namely, the question of disarmament.
84.	We do not share the view of those who do not consider the present situation conducive to a solution of the disarmament problem. To accept that view would be to give way to the forces which are interested in increasing international tension and unleashing new conflicts. The feverish armaments race, which lays a heavy burden on the broad masses of the people, is a dangerous threat to international peace and security and, at the very least, a significant source of international tension.
85.	The interests of mankind and of peace and security everywhere make it imperative that everything possible be done to find a positive solution of the disarmament problem.
86.	Athough work on a general disarmament programme is at present encountering certain difficulties, that gives us no reason or excuse for blocking all action on the question. There are a number of particular aspects of it on which agreement could be quickly reached: a reduction in armed forces and conventional armaments, a reduction in military budgets, the prohibition of tests of atomic and hydrogen weapons, the creation of a special zone in Europe where armaments would be limited and controlled.
87.	Already last year the Czechoslovak Government, in an effort to make a practical contribution to solving the problem of disarmament, reduced the numerical strength of the Czechoslovak People's Army by 34,000 men, and this year by 10,000 more. This year defence expenditures in our country decreased by 7.9 per cent, as compared with 1955. Similar steps taken by the other peace-loving countries are convincing evidence of the fact that the disarmament problem can be solved and that the decisive factor for its successful solution is goodwill on the part of the Governments of the countries concerned and their willingness to reach agreement. If such agreement has not yet been reached even on particular aspects of the disarmament problem, this is not due to “technical difficulties” but only to insufficient willingness on the part of the Western Powers.
88.	In the opinion of the Czechoslovak delegation, the proposals made by the Government of the Soviet Union in its statement of 17 November 1956 [A/3366] are an outstanding contribution to the solving of the disarmament problem. In making these proposals, the Soviet Union has once again given convincing proof of its goodwill and sincerity and has taken a further step towards bringing its views into line with those of the Western Powers.
89.	The Western Powers, which are repudiating one after the other the very proposals they themselves had previously made, have, of late, indicated that they have no desire to engage in direct negotiations on a plan for the reduction of armaments and the prohibition of atomic weapons, as long as there is no acceptance of the “open skies” proposal made by the United States. For the sake of reaching agreement on this question, the new Soviet proposals go a long way to meeting this demand also. Now it is for the Western Powers to show goodwill and make their contribution towards attaining a goal on which the hopes of all peace-loving mankind are pinned, namely the reduction of armaments and the prohibition of atomic weapons, and the establishment of confidence among nations.
90.	Along with the question of disarmament the Czechoslovak Government, guided by the desire to preserve and strengthen international peace, attaches primary importance to the question of collective security in Europe. The Government and people of Czechoslovakia are deeply concerned that Europe*should cease to be a hotbed of tension, and that the people of Europe should enjoy the necessary conditions for a tranquil and peaceful existence. The importance of security in Europe is also indicated by historical^ experience, which shows that military conflicts originating in Europe have always led to world wars and have brought dire distress on all peoples.
91.	The whole course of historical development amply confirms that the only correct way to secure peace in Europe is to establish a system of collective security based on the participation of all European States, regardless of their social or governmental structure.
92.	The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic welcomed the proposal of the Government of the Soviet Union concerning the conclusion of a treaty of non-aggression between NATO member States and countries adhering to the Warsaw Treaty. Such a treaty, to which the Soviet Union and the United States, the countries with the largest military establishments, would be parties, would result in a rapid change in the international atmosphere and would help to establish confidence among States and to lessen international tension. It would create favourable conditions for the conclusion of an all-European collective security treaty.
93.	A treaty providing for a system of collective security in Europe would also facilitate settlement of the German question, the significance of which goes beyond the boundaries of Europe.
94.	It is perfectly obvious that Czechoslovakia, which is a neighbour of both German States, has an immediate and primary interest in the creation of a united, democratic and peace-loving Germany. The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic maintains its view that the question of restoring Germany unity can and should be solved in the first place by direct negotiations between the two German States and with full regard for the further strengthening of European peace and security. We cannot accept a solution of the German question which would lead to increased tension in Europe and jeopardize our own security.
95.	In the course of the general debate, opinions were expressed which did not correctly reflect the danger inherent in the rebirth of German militarism. It was alleged that, with the discovery of atomic energy, there had been so radical a change in contemporary “conditions” that a resurgence of the aggressive spirit in Germany was no longer a serious threat to the security of Germany’s neighbours. We do not share this view. It is not only erroneous, but dangerous for the future development of Europe. We submit that not only our geographical position but, above all, our experience entitles us to draw our own conclusions, winch are indisputably well-founded. In the course of a single generation, mankind has twice had to suffer the horrible catastrophe of a world war. In both cases, aggression came from a militaristic Germany. And today we are asked to believe that war is out of the question and that the security of Germany’s neighbours is enhanced on account of the existence of the atomic bomb. This leaves out of account the fact that the revived Wehrmacht is to be armed with atomic weapons. Germany’s neighbours will never believe that the new Wehrmacht, armed with even more terrible weapons, will be less dangerous than its predecessor before the Second World War. Millions of Germans themselves do not accept this contention, but oppose the re-enslavement of the German people by the ill-famed General Staff.
96.	In its tragic history the Czechoslovak people has endured much hardship and suffering at the hands of German militarism, the enemy of mankind. We do not wish to allow any repetition of that tragedy and we therefore issue a warning concerning the dangerous phenomena which are taking place across the frontier from us in Western Germany, where militarists and revanchards are again raising their heads.
97.	The Czechoslovak delegation feels that it should draw the General Assembly’s attention to a problem in whose solution Czechoslovakia is particularly interested. In spite of the repeated protests of the Czechoslovak Government, uncontrolled balloons are being released into the airspace of the Czechoslovak State carrying leaflets advocating acts of hostility against the Czechoslovak Republic. This hostile propaganda has no effect whatever; the Czechoslovak people flatly reject it. Nevertheless, these balloons are a serious hazard to domestic and international air communications and the explosive substances with which they are filled endanger the health, life and property of persons who come into contact with them.
98.	The Czechoslovak Government has taken a number of steps on the international level to remove this danger, but so far to no avail. It has approached, the Government of the United States through the diplomatic channel, since these balloons are released by United States organizations from bases situated in the Federal Republic of Germany. It has also drawn the attention of the Secretary-General to the situation which has arisen. Similarly, the Government of the Czechoslovak Republic has requested the International Civil Aviation Organization to take steps to put a stop to the violation of Czechoslovak airspace. Up to now, however, no effective measures have been taken.
99.	The launching of balloons of any kind into the airspace of another State without its consent is contrary to international law and constitutes a violation of the sovereignty of that State. Moreover, the balloons released over the territory of Czechoslovakia and of other States are a serious threat to the life and health of the citizens of those countries and in many cases cause considerable damage to property. They are also a danger to air communications and their launching is itself a violation of article 8 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation of 7 December 1944. Such activities are contrary to the principles proclaimed in the United Nations Charter and in a number of other international instruments.
100.	The Czechoslovak delegation considers that the General Assembly should discuss this situation and take action in conformity with the United Nations Charter to prevent the unlawful despatch of uncontrolled balloons over the territory of other States.
101.	Peaceful coexistence and the development of friendly co-operation between peoples are not simply principles we of the Czechoslovak Republic have proclaimed, but are the actual basis for all our activities in the field of foreign policy. Czechoslovakia is strengthening its manifold ties, political, economic and cultural, with all countries regardless of their social systems. Our country has recently been visited by many prominent representatives of various States, by parliamentary delegations and other official guests who have had an opportunity of learning for themselves of the peaceful achievements of the Czechoslovak people and of their desire to live in friendship and co-operation with the peoples of other countries. The Czechoslovak Government intends to continue its efforts to increase and strengthen these many-sided ties.
102.	Czechoslovakia attaches special importance to the development of its economic and commercial relations with all countries regardless of their social and economic systems, on a basis of mutual advantage and of equality of rights between the parties, without discrimination of any kind.
103.	The United Nations should make a more effective contribution to the development of a stable basis for a wide exchange of goods, which would help to bring about the increased co-operation on a worldwide scale in the interests of all nations. One of the most important problems arising in this connexion is that of bringing into being conditions that will ensure a further expansion of world trade, the volume of which still falls far below needs and possibilities, as a firm foundation for the peaceful coexistence of peoples.
104.	Czechoslovakia can give effective assistance in the solution of that problem. In recent years the industrial production of our country has more than doubled by comparison with pre-war years and a powerful economic groundwork has thus been laid on a high technical level.
105.	At the same time, as a result of the rise in the purchasing power of the population, there has been a significant increase in the consumption both of industrial and consumer goods in our country. In our plans for national economic development provision is made for a substantial increase both in production and in consumption, which will at the same time guarantee an expansion in our capacity for trade with all countries.
106.	The volume of international trade could unquestionably be still larger were it not for the continued existence of artificial obstacles erected for political reasons and the futile endeavour to slow the economic development of States with a socialist system.
107.	In spite of these obstacles, however, there has recently been a steady rise in Czechoslovakia’s foreign trade with the capitalist countries. Our economic relations with the economically under-developed countries have taken a particularly favourable course. Between 1953 and 1955 alone, the total volume of our trade with these countries rose by about 140 per cent and a further increase is forecast in the second Five-Year Plan.
108.	One serious obstacle to the successful expansion of world trade is the fact that 1,000,200,000 people, the population of the economically under-developed countries, produce goods and services to the total value of some 150 million dollars, whereas 500 million people, the population of the industrialized countries, annually produce goods and services to the value of over $700,000 million, ten times more per head of population.
109.	We believe that speedy and effective measures should be taken to correct that situation. The principal means of removing the present striking disparity between the industrially developed and the industrially under-developed countries is the industrialization of the under-developed areas as rapidly as possible. It is in the interests of everyone that the economically under-developed countries should more nearly approach the level of the developed countries and should be able to participate in world trade and in the world economy on an equal footing.
110.	As an industrialized country, Czechoslovakia is giving and will continue to give the economically under-developed countries every possible support and assistance.
111.	I have just given the Czechoslovak delegation’s views on the contemporary situation and on certain problems which we believe to be particularly important and for whose solution, in our view, the General Assembly should assume full responsibility.
112.	All peace-loving people have warmly welcomed the definite relaxation of international tension which has taken place of late. They are, however, disturbed and indignant at the intrigues of aggressive groups which are endeavouring to resurrect the past, to increase tension, to cause the situation to deteriorate, to create an atmosphere of hostility and hysteria and to destroy peace and security throughout the world. This can bring no good to ordinary men and women. They expect the United Nations to prevent such a situation from arising. They are anxious that we should make every effort to put the principles of the Charter into effect, and to ensure lasting peace, friendship and co-operation between nations so that every individual may live in peace and without fear for the fate either of his country or of his countrymen.
113.	The Czechoslovak people, freed from the Fascist yoke by the Soviet Army, has embarked on the course of building socialism and has achieved great successes. Fortified by their indestructible friendship and alliance with the USSR and the other countries which are following the same course, the industrious and gifted Czechoslovak people have built a State with a powerful industry and an advanced agriculture; they have created a flourishing country where, as time goes on, they are enjoying the fruits of their labour to an ever-increasing extent.
114.	A few hours ago the Czechoslovak Government, fulfilling a promise it made at the time of the promulgation of the Five-Year Plan for the construction and development of the national economy, declared in the National Assembly that there would be a reduction — the sixth — in the prices of foodstuffs and manufactures. This price reduction represents an annual saving of nearly 1,400 million Czechoslovak crowns to our people. As from 3 December 1956, meat prices in our country will be reduced by 15 to 20 per cent, the prices of meat products by up to 31 per cent and those of preserved and cooked foods by up to 46 per cent. The prices of agricultural products will be reduced by up to 25 per cent. The prices of manufactures, including radio sets, cameras and watches, will be reduced by 18 to 35.5 per cent.
115.	This, the sixth price reduction, has been made possible by the fact that our people is successfully fulfilling the tasks entailed in the development of the national economy. The fact that our people is already, for the sixth time, gathering the fruits of such a policy is but fresh confirmation of the soundness of the policy pursued by our Government, the principal characteristic of which is and always will be a concern to ensure a speedy rise in the material and cultural living standards of our workers.
116.	The Czechoslovak people are rightfully proud of their achievements and are fully determined to go forward along their chosen path, of the correctness of which they have had abundant corroboration.
117.	In the deliberate, firm and wise attitude which they have adopted, the Czechoslovak people have, particularly in recent times, given a clear answer to international reaction, frustrated its hopes and plans and thereby rendered a great service to the cause of peace and security in Europe.
118.	The Government of the Republic of Czechoslovakia, in fulfilment of the wish and will of the whole of our people, intends in future to continue to make every effort to frustrate the plans of the enemies of human happiness, to secure the triumph of the lofty principles of the United Nations Charter, to bring about lasting peace and security and to ensure peaceful coexistence, friendship and, co-operation between all peoples for all time.
