Let me begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your well-deserved election by the General Assembly at one of the most critical moments the United Nations has known, when every gift of intellect and heart is required if this Organization, which came into being after the Second World War, is not to be discredited or destroyed by passions and interests rebelling against the rule of law.
103.	Your election to the Presidency of the eleventh session of the General Assembly is an act not only of justice, but also of reparation; its represents the choice of a person who can guide this delicate organism with vigour, tact and wisdom so that at the conclusion of its work it will have written a fresh chapter in its successful history, thanks to your efforts and to our co-operation.
104.	I also take this opportunity to thank you and the members of the Government of your great country for the courtesy shown me when I visited the capital of Thailand and was able to see the great efforts being made to endow Bangkok, one of the fairest cities of the Far East, with all the amenities of modern civilization. Thailand shows the fruits of a tremendous effort which is deserving of mention as an example to other peoples in a similar situation.
105.	When we celebrated the tenth anniversary of the signing of the United Nations Charter at San Francisco, none could have imagined that a year later our Organization would be undergoing one of the severest tests that could confront a social institution which is still in the experimental stage and which is designed to introduce new methods of international life so as to ensure the security of States, peace among peoples and the extension of the benefits of modern scientific and technical achievements to all men, without distinction of race, nationality or economic situation. We were filled with hope, and we believed that all our problems would be effectively solved by means of peaceful negotiation; we hoped that the bloody and painful lesson of the last two wars would not be forgotten by the generations that suffered from them. Then suddenly the atmosphere of international peaceful coexistence became troubled, and a rapid series of mistakes, which have inflamed men’s feelings and brought to the surface the flotsam and jetsam of past moral shipwrecks, brought us to the verge of a conflict that, if not promptly settled, may well be the beginning of a tragedy whose consequences would be incalculable.
106.	The conflict in the Middle East and the cruel armed intervention of which Hungary has been the victim both spring from the same cause: the violation of law by the use of force.
107.	During the two emergency special sessions of the General Assembly that have just been held, we have heard aggression denounced by almost all the peoples of the earth. In this world forum, accusers and accused have had an opportunity to state their views, and an exhaustive analysis has been made of the deplorable events in Egypt and in Central Europe.
108.	I consider that the debates have clarified the historic process through which we are living with a sensation of tragedy. The resolutions that have been adopted seem to interpret the feelings of the majority of Governments and peoples, who will not be deceived as to what party or parties are responsible for the fact that the two conflicts or either one of them are not yielding to the satisfactory solution which all desire in the hope that the effectiveness of the United Nations as an organization for the maintenance of peace will not be seriously impaired.
109.	No one is any longer misled by sophisms, half-truths or lies, because in the modern world we have sources of information that cannot easily be obstructed and also because we are endowed with a mysterious intuition that inevitably leads us to truth and right despite any apparent temporary ascendancy of evil.
110.	The United Nations does not yet have an army to support it or to enforce its resolutions. This is because the great Powers which were to organize it could not reach any agreement, even though they are members of the Military Staff Committee, which is situated in this city and which was established by the highest military authorities of those Powers. The United Nations in truth can exercise nothing more than moral force, and that, unfortunately, has gone unheeded by those who have recently taken the short cut of violence and lawlessness, disregarding the recommendations for wisdom and calmness heard from this platform.
111.	The United Nations has succeeded in obtaining a cease-fire in the Middle East, but unfortunately the massacre in Hungary has not ceased. Perhaps in that unhappy country, the home of one of Europe’s oldest cultures, we shall find ourselves in a few days confronted with a fait accompli and be unable to do more than mourn the cruel fate which has befallen a people worthy to live in freedom and the enjoyment of all human rights.
112.	In the Middle East, after the cease-fire and the effective withdrawal of the invading armies, many problems will remain to be solved in connexion with the Suez Canal and the conclusion of peace treaties between Israel and the neighbouring Arab countries. The United Nations and the countries directly concerned in this conflict will thus be required to exert their utmost efforts to achieve a durable peace based on respect for the rights of all parties.
113.	The events of the Middle East and in Hungary serve as a lesson that from now on problems and questions such as those which are at this time threatening world peace must not be allowed to become permanent or be left in suspense, since at the most unexpected moment they may arise like monsters threatening to destroy the well-being of nations and seriously to obstruct the peaceful development of mankind.
114.	The United Nations has three fundamental aims: the political aim of safeguarding world peace and security ; the economic aim of promoting the economic development of all the peoples of the earth, of raising their level of living and of enabling all men to participate in the advances that have been made in the conquest of the forces of nature; and the social aim of mobilizing all individual and collective energies so as to achieve a social development matching the economic development. These political, economic and social aims are the reasons why there is a United Nations, for such aims, being of universal scope, can be attained not by a single State or group of States, but only through the co-ordinated efforts of them all. These three aims are closely interrelated, but, despite the attention they deserve from our Organization, progress, particularly in the political field, is very slow.
115.	We do not yet have reason to be proud of the successes of the United Nations, for at every step we encounter difficulties, and we are satisfied with temporary solutions that do not eliminate the underlying causes of conflict. We cannot get to the root of these causes without impairing certain interests which, although inconsistent with the welfare of humanity, are sacrosanct because they appertain to certain Powers. One of these problems is the self-determination of peoples or, in other words, respect for the personality of groups of human beings who, owing to the circumstances of history and in some cases the hazards of geography, are under the domination of States which do not believe in self-determination, simply because they consider it prejudicial to their own interests.
116.	It is true that there are peoples which are not yet ready to guide their own destiny, but for the most part these peoples do not ask for self-determination. Nothing poisons the international atmosphere in the modern world so much as this systematic, unjust refusal of requests which are put forward in a peaceful manner and which should, in recognition of such an incontestable historic fact as the decay of the colonial system, be wisely and generously granted, so that peoples which are truly deserving of the opportunity might be enabled to set themselves up as sovereign States. Those peoples would then become the friends and partners of the former colonizers, their erstwhile masters and guides, and universal progress would ensue.
117.	It is generally recognized that the relatively good feature of colonialism was that it brought to backward, undeveloped and primitive areas the civilization of the colonial Powers. It was by that means, often a cruel means, that a common denominator of civilization could be extended to the ends of the earth.
118.	Material backwardness and primitive cultures remain in only a few places in certain continents. Most of the territories administered by foreign Powers have already reached a stage of maturity which renders them capable of self-determination. Let us then nourish the hope that the Administering Powers will recognize that the time has come to give up their colonies and confine the exercise of sovereignty to their own territories. Only thus can a beginning be made towards the equality demanded by all the peoples in this era of universal democracy.
119.	In the economic field the United Nations has achieved successes which otherwise would not have occurred, or at least would have been long in coming.
120.	If we study carefully the work done by the Economic and Social Council, the regional economic commissions, the Technical Assistance Board, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund, we must admit that there has been considerable progress. This does not mean, of course, that the assistance given to the underdeveloped countries has been sufficient for all their needs. The task is a tremendous one, which has only been begun.
121.	With the solution of the difficulties in the way of stabilizing the prices of raw materials and of investing capital in such countries and for such undertakings as really need it, the foundations will have been laid for the genuine independence of the under-developed peoples.
122.	The economic activities of the United Nations are being carried on satisfactorily, and if, this year, the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development (SUNFED) comes into operation, in accordance with the recommendations of the experts in the matter and the wishes of the less developed countries, satisfaction will have been given to one of the great desires of the poorer countries which for lack of sufficient means have been unable to develop their economies.
123.	This year, during this session, we shall be studying the interim report [A/3134] of the Ad Hoc Committee which examined the replies of all the Governments with regard to SUNFED, and I feel sure that this new agency, for which so many delegations, and in particular those of Latin America, have striven, will shortly come into existence and begin to function.
124.	Great progress has also been made in the social field, thanks to the efforts of the United Nations and the specialized agencies. It may justly be said that the greatest and most successful experiments and studies in the field of contemporary sociology have been due both to this world Organization and to the specialized agencies. We can say with complete confidence that the scope of our social action is increasing from day to day and that there is scarcely any region in the world where the benefits of the United Nations do not make themselves felt. As greater impulse is given to the development of the community, the nations will strengthen and the development of their energies will be more balanced, thus avoiding the disequilibrium between economic and social development which is so frequently encountered.
125.	The task in the social field is an arduous one but it has been tackled with energy and we believe that, within a few years, we shall see the disappearance of a number of ills which prevent mankind from obtaining the full enjoyment of its rights. The eradication of disease, the cleaning up of unhealthy areas, the provision of a balanced and full diet, assistance to mothers and young children, universal education, social security, comfortable, hygienic and attractive dwellings and institutions, work for all in conditions which provide the necessary time and leisure to enjoy the good things of life — all these are measures which will transform the social atmosphere and give opportunities to all.
126.	The work of the United Nations, although not completely realized as yet, deserves general commendation. Its work in the social field is being performed in unity and co-operation between all its Members, benefits from their experience, and deserves their encouragement. In the fulfilment of its social objectives, the United Nations can already point to achievements which are splendid realities and justify the greatest hopes.
127.	The group of countries forming part of the American continent may be proud of the work done during the last fifty years, particularly in the field of international relations and social justice. These countries emerged into a life of political independence with little or no preparation, and many of them were the victims of unpleasant experiences. Fortunately, our countries managed to overcome the remnants of colonialism and to undertake a new life with enthusiasm and a strong will to succeed.
128.	We have succeeded in providing a legal foundation for the relations of this great family of States which have realized that it is not only their duty, but also in their interest to live together in friendship, not only for reasons of geography, but because they realize that they have the same destiny and the same needs, and that they can assume an identical role in the great task of forging the destiny of mankind and play their part in world history.
129.	The Organization of American States, which is becoming more and more effective in this hemisphere, is linked with the United Nations and performs a regional function of a new kind and one not so far practised in other continents. The legal, economic and social problems of our continent have factors in common with those of other parts of the world, but it is undeniable that the people of America have been able to give them a special character which distinguishes them from those of Europe or Asia, for instance.
130.	We are doing our best to strengthen the American regional system, because we believe that it is in this way that we can collaborate most effectively in the work of the United Nations. As Members of both organizations, our countries are constantly endeavouring to strengthen the bonds between two bodies which supplement each other in the pursuit of a common ideal.
131.	Particular social problems of America, such as the Indian problem in some regions, deserve our most serious concern. The United Nations has paid close attention to these matters and, thanks to its technical assistance, appreciable progress has been made.
132.	Every citizen of the American continent cherishes the idea of a great continental fatherland. This idea is closely linked with the hope for a world organization. However, we have a long path to tread before nation, region and world organization can coexist harmoniously as essential factors of a world unity.
133.	Our flourishing industries, our rich agriculture and the increasing development of our trade will make this continent a strong bulwark of law and the most effective defender of freedom and democracy.
134.	“The Charter of the United Nations is an admirable code for international coexistence” — said Mr. Camilo Ponce Enriquez, in his Message to the Nation, on assuming office as President of Ecuador on September of this year. “But the Charter requires amendment,” he continued, “to eliminate provisions which are too political or too absurd, such as giving more weight to the negative vote of one member of the Security Council than to all the votes of the other members. A greater voice should be given to the medium-sized and smaller States.”
135.	To meet, at least in part, this need for revision, the delegation of Ecuador, in association with other delegations of Latin America, and with the delegation of Spain, has presented three proposals for amendment, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 108 of the Charter. The first of these [A/3446] is aimed at increasing the number of non-permanent members of the Security Council and the number of votes required for action by that body. The second [A/3139] aims at increasing the membership of the Economic and Social Council, and the third [A/3140] is a proposal to increase the number of judges on the International Court of Justice. The authors of these proposals have felt that it is essential to increase the number of representatives of Member States of the United Nations in the bodies I have mentioned. The world Organization now has a membership of seventy-nine States, and it does not seem fair that only six of these States should be non-permanent members of the Security Council, that only eighteen should be on the Economic and Social Council, and fifteen on the International Court of Justice. When our Organization consisted of sixty Members only, such a limited membership may have been acceptable, but today, when the United Nations is happily assuming a more universal character, we believe that it is essential to increase the number of non-permanent members of the Security Council to eight, the membership of the Economic and Social Council to twenty-four and the number of judges of the International Court to eighteen. This would enable the new Member States to satisfy their reasonable ambition to obtain a seat in these bodies and to co-operate in their work.
136.	My delegation believes that the draft resolutions which are to be presented deserve the support of this Assembly. We shall also be presenting a proposal for an increase in the size of another very important body, the International Law Commission, for the same reasons as I have already indicated.
137 The Organization has decided to constitute the United Nations Emergency Force to secure and supervise a cessation of hostilities in the Middle East and has appointed General Burns to command it. The Force is to be provided by States which are not permanent members of the Security Council, and, we think, preferably by those which are at a distance from the scene of conflict. This United Nations Force has been established to perform a police function exclusively, and some Governments have already offered small contingents which are on their way to Egypt. I have been instructed by my Government to place at the disposal of the Secretary-General of the United Nations a small contingent which may consist of something between 100 and 500 men. My Government also intends to comply with resolution 1006(ES-II) of the General Assembly requesting the co-operation of all Member States in providing effective assistance to refugees from Hungary.
138.	Ecuador is prepared to receive Hungarian families, particularly those engaged in agriculture, and to provide land and facilities to enable them to start work with good prospects of success. We are also prepared to welcome a number of Hungarian children to whom we shall offer a new country and a new home in the Ecuadorian family.
139.	Ecuador believes that its duty as a Member of the United Nations not only imposes upon it the formal obligations stated in the Charter, but also requires it to practise democracy in its international relations and within its territory, in order that its people may enjoy full political, social, economic and cultural rights.
140.	In their 134 years as a Republic, the people of Ecuador have demonstrated their rejection of tyranny and their clear and firm democratic feelings. Today, Ecuador can stand before the world as a country which has come of age, because it practises and lives democracy in its daily life. In Ecuador, the human person is respected, there is full freedom of information and all Ecuadorians are equal before the law. All political parties have free play, and public opinion may be freely expressed.
141.	In fulfilling honestly its obligations to the people which elected it, the Government of Ecuador is also fulfilling honestly the obligations imposed upon it by the Charter, and is endeavouring to achieve within its territory the highest standards of civilized communal living, Ecuador is therefore able to speak freely today on legal and political matters, without laying itself open to the charge that it expresses an international version which is at variance with the national reality lived by its people. When the Government of Ecuador condemns aggression, it is because Ecuador is not and has never been an aggressor nation, and when it defends the freedom of the Hungarian people to have the Government which the majority selects, it does so because Ecuador has a Government freely elected by the Ecuadorian people.
142.	It is in times of trial that one learns to know men and institutions. I should not like to conclude without expressing my admiration for the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who is bearing with exemplary dignity and untiring efficiency the heavy responsibilities we have laid upon him. The delegation of Ecuador wishes to express its sincere thanks to him and to the devoted officials who have accompanied him in recent weeks.
