Every age has brought about some remarkable change in the fortunes of man — either a spiral advancement in his culture, his arts and his economic progress, or a retrogression in, or arrest of, his further development. In our age it is generally believed that civilization has reached the peak of achievement, due chiefly to the wonderful discoveries in recent centuries. These discoveries have greatly added to man’s advancement and brought about an evolution in his way of life: better health, greater comforts and more conveniences — in short, a life completely unknown to his forefathers. Equally so, it is also admitted that through such scientific achievements man now stands on the brink of his own destruction. Secrets of nature in his possession make him master of life and death over every living thing upon this planet. The question, grave and serious, that confronts him is whether such knowledge shall be used for his further advancement or for his complete annihilation.
135.	A famous scientist was once asked if there were any counter measures to the atomic and hydrogen bomb. “Yes”, replied the scientist, “peace.” We know from human experience that peace is possible when man is able to live in a society based upon the principles and practice of brotherhood. The world today is witnessing the struggle to put such principles into practice either by peaceful means or by violent upheavals. The motto of the French revolution, “liberty, equality, fraternity”, is no longer confined solely to Frenchmen. It is now the slogan of all mankind, whether in the East or the West. This slogan has now assumed a new name, “nationalism”. By some nations, the sudden outburst of national aspirations by dependent peoples seems to be viewed with some degree of scepticism and astonishment. It should be recognized that every spirited individual longs and seeks to assume the dignity, respect, freedom and independence of a man, and is inherently entitled to this both spiritually and naturally. This is a human instinct.
136.	Such aspirations are not unique in the history of the human race, and if we care to scan the pages of man’s biography with an open and unbiased mind, completely divorced from petty prejudice, we will find in every age, whether ancient, mediaeval or modern, man’s struggle to obtain the benefits of self-determination and independence from his masters.
137.	As it is instinctive in the human individual at some time in his development to assume the responsibility of manhood with its characteristic qualities of independence and self-reliance, so the nations and peoples of the world have the right to aspire to be independent and masters of their own affairs. It is therefore gratifying to note that many of the Powers have come to realize that the right to independence and freedom is a divine inspiration which, when once aroused, can be thwarted or squashed by physical or brute force but cannot be exterminated. We therefore commend such Powers, as, in their realization of this right, have given independence and self-determination to several of the once dependent peoples that are now Members of this Organization and are actively participating in its deliberations. It is to be hoped that the process of granting independence and self-determination to other dependent peoples will be greatly accelerated.
138.	With the discoveries of the wireless, the telephone, television and other scientific inventions the struggle for self-mastery has become more pronounced and open. There are no longer unknown lands and isolated people: there is now but “one world”, as it was expressed in so timely a manner by that great American, Wendell Wilkie.
139.	The horizon opens up on a new day. We enter a new conflict, an ideological conflict, a new phase in the affairs of men and nations. In this new struggle man has added yet another weapon to his arsenal — radio and television propaganda. This weapon was extensively and effectively used in the Second World War. It served both the victor and the vanquished. It became known as the fifth weapon, and greatly contributed to the success or defeat of either side. It was a double-edged sword. In the remotest corners of the earth the inhabitants were bombarded day and night in their own languages with the war cries of the Allies or their adversaries. We heard such catch phrases as: “The fight for democracy”, “The four freedoms”, and “The self-determination of peoples”. At the same pitch the propaganda of the Axis tuned to similar strains. Have these pledges been fulfilled?
140.	Whether through inclination or from an instinct for self-preservation, mankind has, since the dawn of history, always shown a tendency to bracket himself into groups or pacts. History has recorded that through such groupings the tribes and clans came into existence; these in turn gave birth to the various nations with their peculiar cultures and customs. The nations, history has also recorded, banded themselves into pacts or alliances for their own preservation or for the conquest and exploitation of their neighbours. The result of such partnerships has been continuous conflict between States, which grows more fierce and deadly with every passing generation. Despite the terrible consequences of the last two great wars, the nations seem not to profit by the mistakes of yesterday. Today we see the old game being replayed — the aligning of nations against each other, under different names and forms, each side giving as its motive “self-preservation”. In the forming of the United Nations it was hoped that out of such an organization would have grown a world alliance for the protection and defence of the rights of all peoples and nations. That goal seems still to be beyond our grasp.
141.	Despite all that has happened or that is likely to happen, we seem still to be imbued with the concept of alliances and counter-alliances; and so strong is our feeling in this regard that we could not divorce our minds from such a conception in the framing of the United Nations Charter. Hence, provisions for regional pacts were embodied in that document. Such pacts or blocs have not added to the strength of the Organization: they have, rather, made it powerless to act. The effectiveness and strength of the United Nations appear to be enervated by the conflicting interests of the nations. As long as these conflicting interests exist, right and justice are lost in the labyrinth of national interest and power politics.
142.	We come to the conference table with fixed ideas and immovable positions. Having formed ourselves into blocs in order to protect or foster some mode of life peculiar to our environment, or to enhance or maintain our position in world affairs, our stand becomes inflexible. The Organization, instead of being united, is now shattered into blocs which seem to be losing all power of cohesion. Such compacts appear not only to have paralysed the Organization’s decisions, but also to have penetrated the operation of the Organization itself, making it difficult for the Organization to work smoothly. Offices, memberships of committees, seats on various subsidiary organizations are all apportioned according to the strength of the nations and the size of each bloc. In such conditions, no nation can afford to stand aloof, basing its interests upon right and justice. To exist in such conditions, it becomes not only necessary but imperative for a State to align itself with the group in which it thinks its interests may be best served and safeguarded. In such a situation, it is difficult to achieve solutions of world problems. But such situations will continue to exist so long as nations do not base their actions upon the right and justice of a cause.
143.	My delegation fully supports the suggestion made here that, owing to the fact that nineteen new Members have been admitted to the Organization, the membership of the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and other United Nations bodies should be increased. It is to be hoped that in this expansion the position of Africa will not be overlooked. Africa is the second largest continent. Its vast resources have added much to the advance of our civilization. It is the only continent which contains so many dependent and underdeveloped people. It is a continent whose vast potential resources still remain to be tapped. Nevertheless, Africa has never been represented directly on any of the important councils of the United Nations, even on those where its interests are most directly affected. I therefore hope that this fact will be borne in mind when seats are allocated on the various councils of the United Nations, under the new policy of expansion based on geographical distribution.
144.	The human race never seems to profit from its past mistakes. The untold sufferings and miseries of past wars appear not to have affected our false sense of values. Right might be forever on the scaffold and wrong on the throne, but unless that scaffold governs our future, man will not be saved from the horrors and destruction of war. My Government therefore strongly disapproves of the resort to force or violence in the settlement of any dispute, national or international — for it is immoral to effect just ends by unjust means.
145.	Moreover, we strongly believe in the spirit of the law; we believe that the law should be applied fairly and impartially to all, despite race, creed or origin: as it is in human affairs, so should it be in international affairs. We therefore hold and believe that treaties and international agreements should be considered as sacred, binding and inviolable. They should not be unilaterally abrogated by any nation, great or small, whenever the agreements no longer seem to harmonize with that nation’s political ambitions or national aspirations. Trust and confidence are the keystones of all moral obligations; when these are shattered, man sinks to the status of the brute.
146.	We extend a hand of welcome to the many new Members already admitted, or to be admitted in the future, to this Organization — and especially to those States which have recently gained their independence. It is to be hoped that we shall give them our sympathy and encouragement in their endeavours at nation-building. We also hope that the old and experienced nations will not view their mistakes or shortcomings through the magnifying lens of the telescope, and their achievements through the opposite end.
147.	In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate and reaffirm the following points: First, it adheres to the provisions of the Charter which declare that all peoples have an inherent right to self-determination. Second, the present advance which has been made in science should be utilized for peaceful purposes. Third, although the Charter provides for the formation of regional pacts, the principles of right and justice should prevail whenever there is a conflict between the two objectives. Fourth, the delegation of Liberia unequivocally disapproves of the resort to force or violence for the settlement of any dispute. Fifth, it firmly believes in the sanctity and inviolability of treaties and international agreements; it believes that such treaties and agreements should not be unilaterally abrogated. Finally, we extend to the President our hearty congratulations on the imprimatur which his colleagues have placed upon his past services by electing him to the high office of President of the eleventh session of the General Assembly.
148.	The delegation of Liberia hereby renews its pledge to co-operate fully and to support all measures which have as their objective the realization of the ideals embodied in the Charter of our Organization. It is our sincere hope that the spirit of moderation, tolerance, patience and harmony which has characterized some of our previous sessions will also prevail during tire present session of the Assembly.
