The delegation of the United Kingdom of Libya, which has just arrived at United Nations Headquarters, has the pleasure of conveying to the General Assembly the best wishes of its Government for the successful conduct of the Assembly’s discussions and the success of its work at this session.
186.	The Libyan delegation also takes great pleasure in expressing to Prince Wan Waithayakon, President of the General Assembly, its warmest congratulations on the great confidence shown him by his colleagues, who were happily inspired when choosing him to guide the work of this session. In tendering him its congratulations, it also extends to the President its best wishes for the successful discharge of his important functions, and has the honour to promise him its closest and most sincere co-operation. It also warmly congratulates the members of the Assembly’s General Committee.
187.	The Libyan delegation is more than happy to compliment the Secretary-General on the manner in which he is performing his onerous and numerous duties, add wishes to transmit to him and to his colleagues an expression of esteem mingled with appreciation, admiration and encouragement.
188.	My delegation, in the name of the United Kingdom of Libya recently admitted to membership in the United Nations, wishes, on behalf of the Government and people of Libya, to impart a fraternal and a friendly greeting to all those Member States of the United Nations that in words and deeds have shown their desire to establish peace, mutual respect, co-operation and friendship among the countries of the world, for friendship, in our opinion, should be founded on frankness, mutual respect and healthy realism, as well as on understanding and co-operation in matters of common interest.
189.	The Libyan delegation takes pleasure in addressing its warm congratulations and a cordial welcome to the States recently admitted to membership in the United Nations. It halts, in particular, the admission to the United Nations family of the Sudan, Tunisia and Morocco, countries which are bound to our own by ties of brotherhood and good neighbourliness, and whose past has been made glorious by their struggle to achieve freedom for their peoples.
190.	The recent course of world events and the perilous turn given to the international situation by the use of armed force to settle international questions as typified by the attack launched in the Middle East, against the territorial integrity of the Republic of Egypt, strengthen Libya’s conviction that, in order to prevent the spread of armed aggression and in the last analysis to avert a general catastrophe, the United Nations, on the principle of the settlement of international disputes by the peaceful means set forth in the Charter, must act firmly and courageously to prevent any threat to peace; it must stop every act of aggression directed against the integrity of a Member State or the aspirations of any nation which solves to live in human dignity and freedom and thereafter join the United Nations as a new member of our international family. The Libyan delegation accordingly speaks for the Libyan people in expressing the satisfaction felt at the news that the United Nations had intervened to halt the aggression committed against Egypt, and their fervent hope that similar action will be taken to halt the aggression which, alas, has long been directed against the nations of Palestine and. Algeria.
191.	I would emphasize that, in the light of its experience as a member of the League of Arab States, and as a participant in the African-Asian conference held at Bandung, Indonesia, in 1955, Libya considers that groups of this character have made a sincere and active contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security and are acting in accordance with the principles and ideals of our Charter, Chapter VIII of which, in recognizing the legality of such regional arrangements, regards them as fit and proper to participate in the maintenance of peace and to end aggression.
192.	The Libyan delegation would add that, in its opinion, one of the most effective ways of establishing international peace, understanding and co-operation is to ensure that the principle of the self-determination of peoples is applied; to aid the peoples in their will to enjoy that right; and to intervene in their support when their very aspiration to this universal right exposes them to armed attack. My delegation accordingly believes that the Palestinian question, the Algerian question and all other questions of like nature should be settled by the United Nations in accordance with that right. I would point out at this juncture that my country, which acquired that right under the auspices of the United Nations, has always endeavoured to model its Conduct on the principles of the Charter, and has successfully resolved to settle by peaceful means certain difficult questions left pending with the Powers which once occupied its territory.
193.	My, delegation considers it a further factor for peace that the United Nations should foster international co-operation in the peaceful utilization of the more important sources of energy as a means of promoting economic progress and leading all peoples to prosperity. Libya has every interest in the efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency to achieve this purpose and is ready to co-operate with the Agency, and would be willing to assist it by placing at its disposal whatever space it might be able to use in one or more of its fields of activity.
194.	Only a few days ago the Libyan people, in unreserved gratitude and with a joy sobered by the regrettable acts of aggression committed to the east and to the west of our country, celebrated an event as dear to them as the Organization responsible for that event, I refer to 21 November, the anniversary of the resolution [289 (IV)] adopted by the General Assembly in 1949 concerning the independence of the United Kingdom of Libya. I wish to assure the Assembly that Libya is doing everything in its power to maintain and strengthen that independence. The Libyan delegation takes this opportunity of expressing its gratitude and appreciation for the technical assistance Libya is receiving from the United Nations.
195.	In conclusion I would utter a fervent hope that this Assembly will have yet other opportunities to win further titles to humanity, honour and glory through the adoption of resolutions similar to that of 21 November 1949 for the benefit of nations now striving heroically that the principles of human dignity, self-determination and freedom which, inspired our Charter may prevail.
