At its eleventh session the General Assembly is facing critical and difficult problems which demand our full attention. We have before us various matters which must be examined strictly in accordance with the terms of the Charter. My delegation will try to give its views on the most important of these matters so as to establish its position in regard to them.
58.	First of all, let me refer to agenda items 66 and 67 which are being considered in plenary session.
59.	Item 66 is entitled “Question considered by the first emergency special session of the General Assembly from 1 to 10 November 1956”.
60.	At this stage of the general debate, having studied the various resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, we consider it our duty as a Member of this international Organization, to state emphatically that we wish to see all forces still on Egyptian soil other than those of the United Nations, leave Egypt as soon as possible.
61.	We insist that it is the duty of the Israel forces to return to the lines established by the Armistice Agreement of 1949 and that the other countries which still have troops on Egyptian soil should likewise withdraw them. It is the duty of the Governments of the United Kingdom and France, as Member States responsible for safeguarding international peace and security, to take immediately whatever measures may be necessary to ensure that the withdrawal of their forces is carried out as quickly as possible.
62.	Paraguay, a country which will brook no compromise where its sovereignty is concerned, is adamant in its position on this aspect of international law. We maintain that the sovereignty of a people ends where the sovereignty of other peoples begins. There can be no international excuse for non-national forces, with the exception of the supervisory forces of the United Nations, where necessary and by agreement, to occupy the territory of a free and sovereign nation.
63.	The history of Paraguay written in heroism, suffering and blood that our people may be worthy of the heritage of our forefathers, is a call to the present generation and even more to its rulers. Paraguay has always been and will always be a jealous defender of its sovereignty. As such it cannot but protest when the right of sovereignty which it claims for itself is denied to another country or to other peoples.
64.	For that reason it has supported and voted in favour of all the resolutions proposed in this Assembly to secure the earliest possible withdrawal of the United Kingdom, French and Israel forces from Egyptian territory. Let us hope that the support we have given to the United Nations will help to bring about the withdrawal of those forces.
65.	Once that objective has been attained, we are firmly convinced that the United Nations must make an all-out effort to resolve the serious and longstanding problem of the Middle East, not in part but in its entirety, for it is apparent that unless we can be sure of an atmosphere of calm we shall never have peace and security in that part of the world.
66.	Paraguay reiterates its faith and its confidence in the United Kingdom, France, Israel and Egypt. We hope that those nations, traditional friends of Paraguay, will return to the path of international understanding and that under the auspices of the United Nations they will resolve their problems with justice and with renewed faith in the future of the world.
67.	The other aspect of the Middle East conflict is the practical matter of clearing the Suez Canal, as envisaged in the General Assembly resolution of 24 November 1956 of which Canada, Colombia, the United States of America, India, Norway and Yugoslavia had been the sponsors. The resolution “notes with approval the progress so far made by the Secretary-General in connexion with arrangements for clearing the Suez Canal, as set forth in his report” and “authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with the exploration of practical arrangements and the negotiation of agreements so that the clearing operations may be speedily and effectively undertaken”.
68.	My delegation has already explained its abstention in the voting on this matter, but we feel obliged to press our point once more with regard to the scope of the resolution. With the best will in the world we do not feel that the expense of clearing the Suez Canal can or should be shared pro-rated by the Member States. We wish to state here and now that Paraguay cannot contribute to those costs, either under its regular budget or as an extraordinary item. Our peculiar economic problems make it impossible for us to undertake a commitment of this nature. The Secretary-General indicates in his preliminary report [A/3376] that he is not yet prepared to suggest how those costs should be allocated among the Member States of the United Nations. We hope that with his great ability and wisdom he can help to work out a fair way of meeting the expense of clearing the Suez Canal. We want to see that vital international waterway back in operation as quickly as possible so as to relieve the difficult situation in which the many Canal users now find themselves. But, we repeat, the solution must be fair and equitable toward countries like my own which are not in a position to undertake such expenditure. It was for that reason that my delegation abstained in the voting.
69.	I now turn to item 67, entitled “Question examined by the General Assembly at its second emergency special session from 4 to 10 November 1956”. This item was considered at the second emergency special session under the title “The situation in Hungary”, The bloody repression of the Hungarian people, the mass deportation of Hungary’s youth, and the debates stirred by those brutal acts of aggression committed by the Soviet forces are still fresh in our minds.
70.	Ever since this tragic episode was first discussed by the Security Council and subsequently by the General Assembly at its second emergency session, the delegation of Paraguay has given its support to all the resolutions calling for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungary. The reaction to those recommendations has been a systematic campaign of repression by the armed forces of the Soviet Union. The campaign has now been extended to include the mass deportation of Hungarian youth, which is thus paying the penalty for the crime of having aspired to freedom. In the United Nations the whole civilized world has given voice to its sense of, outrage. These halls have echoed the anguish of all mankind at the fate of the brave Hungarian people. The abhorrence and condemnation of the massacre and extermination carried out by the armies of the Soviet Union are reflected in the various resolutions approved by the General Assembly at its emergency special session and at the eleventh session.
71.	Never before has the United Nations been so unified in its efforts as in the search for a solution to the problem of Hungary. The international community has made an urgent appeal for justice and freedom on behalf of an entire nation which had called upon the United Nations for help to secure the withdrawal of the army of the Soviet Union from Hungarian soil. The moral forces of the world spoke as one in support of the desire of the Hungarians to rid themselves of the oppression of Soviet armed might.
72.	So far, the reiterated appeals of the United Nations have been met with strong silence; or rather, the answer has been the slaughter and extermination of the Hungarian people. Occupation of Hungarian soil has meant savage repression, massacre and deportation. This is the outcome of the ruthless policy of the Soviet Union, a Member State of the United Nations and a country responsible, as a member of the Security Council, for peace, tranquillity, justice and security throughout the world.
73.	The only praiseworthy aspect of the situation is the assistance being given by the United Nations to the thousands of Hungarian refugees who have been able to leave their country in search of help and a better life. Those who have remained in Hungary could also be assisted by the United Nations; but there are still many obstacles to be overcome in that direction. Let us hope that the Secretary-General will be able to obtain facilities, not from the Hungarian people but from the Soviet Union, to carry out this humanitarian work.
74.	This is a suitable opportunity to express once more our profound sympathy for the brave people of Hungary in their misfortune, and to repeat that Paraguay supports unconditionally and without reservation their desire to be a free and sovereign nation with a Government of their own express choice.
75.	With regard to agenda item 22 concerning the regulation, limitation and balanced reduction of armed forces and armaments, my delegation will support any measure adopted with a view to bringing about world disarmament based on justice, logic and the balance of forces, but always under strict international control. We are keen advocates of disarmament, because the world needs peace and tranquillity. On this we are in agreement. It is only with regard to the way of bringing it about that there are differences of opinion.
76.	We advocate as a first step the establishment of an international control organ which is to guarantee in, advance the disarmament measures to be taken later. Unlimited aerial photography control should also be established prior to any agreement on the suspension of nuclear bomb tests or the destruction of already existing stockpiles of such weapons.
77.	The Soviet Union has submitted new proposals for disarmament [A/3366, para. 26). First of all, the Soviet Union proposes the reduction of armed forces to specific figures within two years and recommends that armaments be reduced accordingly.
78.	Secondly, it proposes that within the two-year period the prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons should be effected together with the cessation of the production of nuclear weapons, the prohibition of their use, the complete destruction of stockpiles of these weapons and their removal from the armaments of States; and that as a first step, tests of atomic and hydrogen weapons should be discontinued forthwith,
79.	The third proposal provides that the armed forces of the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and France stationed in the territory of Germany should be reduced by one-third during 1957, with the establishment of the appropriate control over this reduction.
80.	In its fourth proposal, the Soviet Union recommends that a considerable reduction in the armed forces of the United States, the United Kingdom and France stationed in the territory of the countries participating in NATO should be effected during 1957, and of the armed forces of the Soviet Union stationed in the territory of the Warsaw Treaty countries.
81.	Under the fifth proposal, foreign military, naval and air bases in the territory of other States would be liquidated within two years.
82.	The sixth proposal prescribes that the military expenditures of States should be reduced in the course of two years in conformity with the reduction of armed forces and armaments, the prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons and the liquidation of foreign military bases in the territory of other States.
83.	Finally, the seventh proposal provides that, for supervision of the fulfilment of the disarmament obligations assumed by States, strict and effective international control should be established, with all the rights and functions necessary for these purposes. It goes on to say that “In order to prevent a surprise attack upon one State by another, control posts should be set up on a basis of reciprocity at large ports, railway junctions, motor highways and airfields, which will see to it that no dangerous concentration of armed forces and armaments occurs”.
84.	All these phrases are well known to the Western world. The Soviet Union has never consented to the prior establishment of an international organ, before the study of disarmament itself is taken up. This is the difference between what the two groups — West and East — would like to see. For the West, such a guarantee is essential, since it is only thus that a relative state of peace can be attained.
85.	My delegation maintains that unless this organ for strict control is set up in advance, any disarmament promises or programmes submitted are nothing more than calculated propaganda.
86.	The only new element in the disarmament programme now submitted by the Soviet Union is the acceptance in a limited form, of aerial photography control. This would apply, however, only to certain areas and would not have the scope of President Eisenhower’s plan, which calls for the inspection of the entire territory of the United States of America and the Soviet Union.
87.	The Soviet proposal for limited inspection does indicate an important shift in the attitude of the Soviet Union, since it formerly opposed the basic principle of President Eisenhower’s plan. Let us hope that this shift may prove auspicious for the later study of the matter.
88.	Turning to agenda item 27 concerning economic development of under-developed countries, my delegation considers it imperative to reach agreement as quickly as possible on the establishment of a Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development. It is our understanding that this body would in future carry out the plans drawn up and at present handled by the Technical Assistance Board. Once the underdeveloped countries have gone through the preparatory phase which technical assistance is designed to make possible, they will come up against difficulties in their schemes for establishing or improving their economic and social infrastructure.
89.	We are definitely of the opinion that the Special Fund should begin its work by concentrating on the infrastructure, and then go on to other aspects of development or plans for industrial and agricultural production. In principle we agree that the Fund should begin its work with an initial capital of $200 million to $250 million, made up of voluntary .contributions, in addition to the capital which will be diverted to it, in accordance with the resolution approved by the General Assembly, once an adequate programme of world disarmament has been put into operation.
90.	With regard to the type of currency in which contributions should be made, we reserve the right to express our point of view when the time comes.
91.	We consider that the Fund should be able to make grants and especially long-term, low-interest loans. We agree that the Fund should be an autonomous body functioning independently within the framework of the United Nations and co-operating closely with the various bodies,
92.	We are convinced that the United Nations should give its utmost attention to this problem, the reason being that the improvement of living standards is essential if international peace and security are to be strengthened.
93.	We now come to item 26 of the agenda concerning programmes of technical assistance. My delegation would like to take this opportunity to express its full satisfaction with the technical assistance offered by the United Nations and its specialized agencies, supplemented by the Expanded Programme.
94.	For the under-developed countries the work done by the United Nations has been strikingly effective, inasmuch as it has gone hand-in-glove; with the efforts of those countries themselves. In my country in particular, it has given new impetus to the programmes which were being planned for the immediate and more remote future. The training of new technicians and the teaching of modern methods have made it possible to deal with economic, social and health problems in a manner more in keeping with the needs of the various countries and regions of the world.
95.	Paraguay has always contributed its share to the technical assistance programme and will continue to do so, being convinced that the combined efforts of that programme and of the individual countries themselves will substantially improve the living standards of the needy peoples of the world.
96.	We come now to items 56, 57 and 59. They concern the question of amending the United Nations Charter, to increase the number of non-permanent members of the Security Council, and to increase the membership of the Economic and Social Council, and the question of amending Article 2 of the statute of the International Law Commission to increase the membership of the Commission. The delegation of Paraguay will fully support these items, the more so as it co-sponsored their inclusion in the provisional agenda of the eleventh session. We did so because we felt that if new Members were to be admitted to the United Nations they must be given the opportunity to contribute the fruits of their culture and civilization to help to strengthen the Organization by their participation in the various Councils.
97.	The goal of the United Nations is the well-being, security and happiness of all peoples; and we believe that all Member States must be given equal opportunities if those ends are to be achieved.
98.	We are sure that an increase in the membership of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council, and the inclusion in those bodies of the new Members of the United Nations, will do much to increase the prestige of our Organization,
99.	In conclusion, on behalf of the people, the Government and the President of Paraguay, we reiterate our deep faith in the work of the United Nations and the high, purposes it is pursuing with vigour and determination.
