This session of the General Assembly of the United Nations is of particular importance in view of the tense international situation in which it is taking place.
148.	Before I give -the views of the delegation of the People’s Republic of Romania on the important questions now facing the General Assembly, I should like, as the representative of a new Member of the United Nations, to give a brief account of the principles which determine the conduct of my country’s foreign policy.
149.	Romania is engaged in a vast programme of construction and economic development, the purpose of which is to raise the material level of living and the cultural standards of the people. Romania used to be known, and has often been described, as offering a market contrast between the economic wealth of the country and the chronic poverty of the masses, a poverty so great that it affected the nation’s biological resources.
150.	In order to measure the extent of the effort being made and the progress that has been achieved in relation to the former situation in Romania, it is significant to note that at the end of 1955 industrial production was about three times greater than in 1938. Three months in the case of electric power, 84 days in the case of iron ore, 4 months in the case of steel, 28 days in the case of methane gas and 79 days in the case of meat products are all that is needed today to equal the entire production of 1938.
151.	From an agricultural country and a producer of raw materials Romania has transformed itself into a fast-growing industrial-agricultural country. It has established industries for the manufacture of machine- tools, tractors and trucks and, conclusive proof, it has succeeded in building up a complete oil equipment industry, which enables it to operate this source of wealth in the interests of the people and the State.
152.	Since Romania has set itself as its principal task the completing of this constructive programme, the country is profoundly and organically concerned in a policy of peace and international co-operation. For this reason it encourages unceasingly in its foreign policy the principles of peaceful coexistence, of co-operation with all countries on an equal footing, with reciprocal respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, and of non-interference in the domestic affairs of other States, In line with these principles, Romania bends its efforts constantly towards the effective expansion of political, cultural and business relations with all countries, regardless of their social system.
153.	The close relations of friendship and mutual assistance which have been established between Romania, the Soviet Union, the People’s Republic of China and the other socialist countries, have been loyally placed at the service of the interests of these countries and of those of international peace and security. In fact everything in this friendship serves to maintain and strengthen the cause of peace.
154.	During the last ten years — a period during which the popular democratic regime has developed and definitely consolidated itself — Romania has expanded its relations so as -to include many countries in Europe, Asia and the Near East and established diplomatic and economic relations with some of them for the first time. The People’s Republic of Romania has economic relations with sixty-two countries and is making practical efforts to develop economic, political and cultural relations with States in Western Europe, North America and Latin America.
155.	Taking as its point of departure the principle that there is no dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations, the Romanian Government has taken the initiative in settling problems left pending with other countries. Let me recall that during the -last few months, Romania has re-established diplomatic relations, interrupted by the last war, with Greece, one of its close neighbours. It has also invited the United States of America to discuss certain problems which are pending between the two countries, to promote commercial and cultural relations between them, and to develop ties of friendship between the American and Romanian peoples. We are sure that truly sound relations can only exist between States that respect each other’s national independence.
156.	Romania won its complete national independence in the popular rising against Hitlerism on 23 June 1944, a rising which removed Romania from the hated Hitlerian war and joined it to the United Nations by its struggle and by the blood shed by the Romanian army side by side with the Soviet Army to crush Nazi Germany once and for all.
157.	These guiding principles of the foreign policy of the People’s Republic of Romania correspond to the profound aspirations of the Romanian people and its national interests. The People’s Republic of Romania looks upon the liberation movement among the peoples of the colonial and dependent countries with deep sympathy and understanding. This attitude has a profound historical explanation. In the still recent past, the people of Romania went through bitter experiences; when their country was kept in an economically retarded state and their national wealth was exploited for the profit of the great world monopolies, while Romanian Governments changed incessantly according to the interests of a few great Western capitals, and Romania was dragged into military adventures which bore no relation to its national interests.
158.	For the Romanian people today this dark chapter of their history is finished forever. We greet those States which have recently conquered their independence and are now playing an increasingly important part in the defence of international peace and cooperation. We regard this fact as one of the most important factors for progress in contemporary history. This irresistible advance of the national liberation movement has called attention to the question of the complete liquidation of the colonial system. The attempt to use war to re-conquer lost colonial positions is all the more serious and big with consequence. The aggression launched by England and France, with the support of Israel, against the brave people of Egypt, is characteristic in this respect.
159.	The methods and practices of colonialism, condemned by all mankind, cannot be resumed in the second half of the twentieth century without running the risk of political, economic and military disaster. The energetic and determined reaction of the peace-loving forces, and the almost unanimous resolution [997 (ES-I)] of the General Assembly were able to halt the aggression; the aggressors found themselves isolated and condemned. These results cannot have failed to impress international aggressors.
160.	The Romanian delegation wishes to emphasize that in the interests of peace and security the most important step is the immediate withdrawal of the invading forces from Egyptian territory and the reestablishment of the status quo at the time of the aggression; it was with this understanding that the General Assembly decision was adopted. This is the only way to prevent subsequent complications, and to approach the other questions concerning the Middle East.
161.	The Romanian People’s Republic which has developed economic, cultural and friendly relations with a number of these nations in the Middle East to our mutual benefit, is deeply concerned in the reestablishment of peace in that region, the consolidation of the independence of the Arab States and the promotion of their economic development. The Romanian delegation considers that the United Nations should firmly oppose any further intrigues or plans of aggression in the countries of the Middle East.
162.	Colonialism is a permanent cause of international tension and of the violation of human rights, of conflict and of war. That is why one of the chief and most urgent tasks of the General Assembly is to discuss and to settle equitably the problems on the agenda of Cyprus, Algeria and West Irian. My delegation wishes to lay particular stress on the pressing necessity of settling the Cyprus question which has been referred to the United Nations by Greece.
163.	It is obvious that the colonial regime imposed on the people of Cyprus by the United Kingdom occupying forces is one of the chief sources of disturbance and instability in South East Europe and in the Near East. The Romanian delegation believes that the speedy grant to the Cypriot people of the right of self-determination is in the interests of all States, particularly in view of the fact that recent events have shown that the United Kingdom has transformed Cyprus into a military base for purposes of aggression which threatens the peace and independence of the people of that part of the world. The Romanian people, who are linked with the people of Greece by long ties of friendship and by joint struggles for independence, warmly supports the Greek request for a solution of the Cyprus problem in accordance with the burning aspirations of the Cypriot people for liberty.
164.	The Hungarian situation has been brought up before the General Assembly on several occasions. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Romania has had occasion, several times, to express its opinion on this matter, which was, and is, a domestic problem of the Hungarian State. We consider that the failure of Fascist Horthyist elements to restore the former regime by making use of the popular movement which was seeking to strengthen the people’s democracy, has removed the possibility of Hungary becoming a centre of trouble and disturbance in the heart of Europe.
165.	It must be understood that when we refer to Fascists and Horthyists we are not bringing into the discussion any new factor which needs interpretation. We mean the persons who were part of, or who directed, the Horthyist formations, and who styled themselves thus at the time when they were in power. What is indispensable at present is to assist the Hungarian people to recover from their cruel sufferings and to rebuild their lives. The Romanian Government is determined to give every assistance to the people of Hungary, their friends and neighbours.
166.	The Romanian Government considers that the disarmament question is the essential problem which must be solved in order to secure a lasting peace. An agreement on disarmament could open up vast possibilities for the solution of international conflicts. The world would have taken a great step towards peace. The peoples would be relieved of the heavy burden of military expenditure and of the atmosphere of tension which has been created in order to justify these expenses. On the other hand to continue the armaments race, to go on heaping- up conventional weapons, atomic weapons and hydrogen weapons, would mean increasing the danger of unleashing a new aggression, for the armaments race gives rise to tension, to cold war, and to the policy of positions of strength which must tend to direct the course of events towards a third world war.
167.	The history of the disarmament talks which, at the League of Nations, served as a smoke-screen behind which international aggressors could intensify the armaments race and prepare their plans for unleashing the Second World War, should be ever present in our minds. We agree with those representatives who, in speaking of the need to solve this problem and of its importance, emphasized the responsibility which falls on all countries but particularly on the great Powers.
168.	The General Assembly has had before it the new proposals by the Government of the Soviet Union, set out in a statement [A/3366] of 17 November 1956, on the question of disarmament and the easing of international tension. The Romanian delegation considers these proposals to be a most important contribution, which could lead to a positive settlement of the question. It is obvious that not only the Romanian People’s Republic but also the majority of countries which are anxious to eliminate the threat of war, to establish favourable terms of trade and to devote their budgets to social work and the development of the national economy, expect that the other great Powers, and first and foremost the United States, will really fall in with the Soviet Union proposals.
169.	I propose to refer to some aspects of the problem which are of particular interest to the Romanian People’s Republic. Romania has reduced the total strength of its armed forces by 60,000 officers and men and has shortened the term of military service, thus giving conclusive proof that it is prepared to put into practice the policy of armaments reduction. The Romanian People’s Republic thinks it essential that an international agreement should be reached on the progressive reduction of the armaments and armed forces of the great Powers and of other countries. We firmly support the Soviet Union proposal concerning the prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons, the discontinuation of nuclear tests, and the establishment of an international control of these measures.
170.	The Romanian People’s Republic has constantly maintained that peace and security in Europe cannot be safeguarded by the establishment of antagonistic military blocs but by the joint efforts of all European States to create a general security system. In this spirit we support the proposal for the conclusion of a nonaggression pact between the NATO and the Warsaw Treaty countries; such a pact would create new and highly favourable conditions for a continuing progress in the direction of general disarmament and the strengthening of peace.
171.	We must point out that the Warsaw Treaty, to which Romania is a party and which was concluded with a view to providing a defence against the danger created by the resurgence of a new Wehrmacht in West Germany, was conceived from the beginning as a conditional pact. It provides that should a system of collective security be established in Europe, and a Treaty concluded for this purpose, for which the Contracting Parties will unswervingly strive, the Warsaw Treaty will lose its validity. The Western Powers, first and foremost among them the United States of America, have engaged in a vast propaganda campaign against the Warsaw Treaty, although they maintain military bases round the Eastern European countries which are parties to the Treaty and large military forces in West Germany. The existence of these bases is undoubtedly a source of tension and a threat to the security of the Eastern European countries.
172.	In its statement before the General Assembly the Soviet Union presented concrete proposals to the Western Powers concerning the elimination of military bases, the reduction of NATO forces and their withdrawal from foreign territory, the withdrawal of Western troops from West Germany, and the withdrawal of Soviet troops from the territory of countries which are signatories to the Warsaw Treaty. The implementation of these measures would undoubtedly bring about a genuine relaxation of tension in Europe and throughout the world.
173.	The importance of the problems we must face and the spirit of responsibility with which they must be approached are all the greater in that, as has already been stressed, we find ourselves at a crucial point in the development of the international situation, when each Member of the United Nations will have to give a definite answer to the following questions: Shall we allow the phantom of cold war to reappear? Shall we allow new plans for aggression to be openly flaunted with calm and cynicism, or shall we decide upon a return to the principles of peaceful co-operation, the only means of ensuring the peace and progress of all peoples?
174.	If we are to repulse the forces of cold war and dispel distrust, our first step should certainly be to endeavour to solve in a realistic and practical spirit the vast problems that at present are in abeyance. At the same time, however, we should devote our full attention to every means of strengthening international co-operation by developing those means for which favourable conditions have been or can be created, namely, commercial and cultural relations and direct contacts between leaders and prominent people of all countries.
175.	In the opinion of my delegation, one problem that deserves attention is the extension and the encouragement of diplomatic relations between States in order to promote and consolidate international cooperation. The development of diplomatic relations is not accorded the same place as the development of international trade or economic, cultural and political relations between States.
176.	If we consider the favourable effect that the recent re-establishment of diplomatic relations between certain countries, broken off as a result of the last world war, has had on the international situation, we see dearly that it would be of real advantage to make some efforts in this direction. Similarly, we are not forgetting that some new States have come into being in the last few years. The general spirit of co-operation between nations will be the more strengthened as these new States are able to develop their diplomatic relations more rapidly. The decision to establish diplomatic relations with one State or another is, of course, a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of each Government. General Assembly recommendations on the subject, which we feel would be both appropriate and feasible, would be of great help in promoting this positive action.
177.	On the subject of economic problems, which are of considerable importance, the Romanian Government considers that the interests of progress and international understanding call of necessity for international trade based upon mutual advantages and developing without artificial barriers or discrimination. Within the framework of international economic cooperation, the problem of economic and technical assistance to under-developed areas assumes particular importance in those areas where, as the Secretary-General points out in his Introduction to the Annual Report on the Work of the Organization [A/3137/ Add.1] "poverty continues to be the, law of life for the great majority of mankind”.
178.	The just solution of this problem is, however, considerably complicated by the vast sums certain States are spending on armaments and by the fact that the assistance these States are giving to underdeveloped areas has a preponderantly military character. The Romanian Government has declared itself in favour of granting economic and technical assistance to under-developed areas on the basis of full equality of rights and without any military or political conditions. It is in this spirit that the Romanian People’s Republic will support the establishment of the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development. We consider that the exchange of technical experience on an international scale, as is in practice developing, could extend to all countries, the most advanced as well as the least advanced. The Romanian Government favours such an exchange of experience. It is prepared, for instance, to pass on to other countries its own experience in the oil industry.
179.	We cannot conclude without re-emphasizing the fact that the particularly important role that the United Nations is called upon to play in the promotion of international co-operation is seriously diminished by the absence from this Organization of representatives of the Chinese people, who number 600 million.
180.	We shall not go into all the aspects of this absurd situation, which is of the utmost prejudice to our Organization. Just consider the fact that twenty-two countries of the two Americas, with a total population of approximately 350 million, have twenty-two votes in this Assembly, whereas the Chinese people, who represent one quarter of mankind, have not a single vote. We are glad, of course, that every nation, no matter how small, has an opportunity to participate with equal rights in the work of the United Nations. We are glad that the United Nations is approaching the full achievement of the principle of universality but that is the very reason why the obstacle raised in the path of international co-operation within the framework of the United Nations by the unjust and inadmissible situation which keeps China excluded from the activity of the Organization, will appear even more flagrant and more obvious — if this situation continues.
181.	I wish to emphasize the particular importance that the Romanian delegation attaches to the role and work of the United Nations. We are living in a period in which the circles that are interested in maintaining and increasing international tension have engaged in aggression and are maintaining a troubled atmosphere favourable to new attacks against the peace and independence of peace-loving States. In these circumstances, it is necessary that all the forces of peace should be mobilized, that the nations should remain on the alert, and that statesmen and Governments should take up the unsolved international problems in a spirit of responsibility.
182.	The United Nations has played and must play an important part in this respect. In order to achieve its noble mission set forth in the Charter — the defence and the maintenance of peace and international security — the United Nations should not be in the position of acting only after the fire has broken out but it should come to grips with the international causes of conflict and tension. It should be ever on the alert to prevent international conflicts and to solve them through negotiations and discussions round the conference table. It is for that reason that we deem it necessary that the United Nations should cease to be used as a platform for propaganda and incitement. The tension created by such cold-war Epigones is an obstacle to constructive efforts. We are convinced that the atmosphere thus created prevents many delegations from making their true and full contribution. We are confident, however, that the United Nations will be able to make of the General Assembly the place of all places for international negotiations for the gradual solution of the problems confronting the United Nations, with the equal participation of all countries, large and small.
183.	The delegation of the Romanian People’s Republic is ready to make its full contribution to the solution of the problems before the Assembly and to cooperate with all those delegations which are animated by the desire to make the spirit of understanding and goodwill, which will consolidate peace and international co-operation, prevail in this Assembly.
184.	I wish to be permitted to associate myself with all the expressions of congratulation which previous speakers have extended to Prince Wan Waithayakon on his election as President of the General Assembly.
