On behalf of the Thai delegation, may I take this opportunity to congratulate His Royal -Highness on his election to the presidency of this Assembly This is a day we will remember with gratitude and with humble pride. We are glad that the name of Thailand will, in the person of Prince Wan Waithayakon, be so closely associated with the effort of this year’s General, Assembly for peace.
166.	During this session of the General Assembly^ the delegation of Thailand hopes that the United Nations will add to its membership another important nation of Asia. I refer to Japan, whose economic and political importance, as well as its rich cultural background, will make a contribution to this world Organization. My delegation will whole-heartedly support its admission.
167.	The tension and conflict attending the opening of this year’s session are unprecedented in United Nations history. I am purposely not going to say anything about observing the “moral principles of the United Nations Charter”, because so much exhortation has been made and so little response given on this theme that it has taken on the hackneyed qualities of a well-worn cliché. It has assumed the character of a vague reproach to which no one pays any attention, so I will not waste time by using it? instead, I will resort to plainer language.
168.	We know that hastily conceived and ineffectively implemented moves do not help in the monumental task of lessening world tensions. So we try to lift ourselves to a place above the tempers and exigencies of the moment and to consider what the far-reaching consequences of our decisions and the decisions of others will be. This is not to say that the passions and arguments arising out of today’s problems are unimportant; on the contrary, they are very important. But their gravest import lies in the effect that the solutions of those problems will have on the future.
169.	We have learned through bitter personal experience that brute force does not always permanently settle disputes between countries. Rather, we have observed that the chances of a longer lasting settlement are much enhanced by the use of negotiation, because only through negotiation can both sides give a little and take a little. We cannot help looking at our neighbours’ problems from the observation tower of our own experience. In this connexion, it is quite dear tint Thailand is not in a position to threaten the world, or any part of the world. Nor have we any inclination to do so. In plain words, we have no axe to grind. In fact, we don’t even have an axe.
170.	Every nation represented here today is a de jure Member of this United Nations. Before we tackle any of the explosive issues on the agenda, however, we must turn our gaze upon ourselves, with a view to answering two fundamental questions.
171.	The first is: Are we united or not? The answer to this question cannot be, “Yes, but...”. It must be, “Yes”. So long as we are Members of this Organization we are united, and we must conduct ourselves accordingly. This is the place and this is the only place that we have in which we can meet and thrash things out. To do so, we must be united in spirit.
172.	The second question is: Are we all, without exception, willing to stand by the majority decisions of the General Assembly? Again, the answer to this question must be “Yes”. So long as we are Members of this united body, we must stand by its majority decisions. While this policy may not always satisfy the chauvinistic elements within our respective countries, it will certainly put an end to bloodshed and warfare between Members of the United Nations. And that, after all, is the monumental task we have come here to accomplish.
173.	There is much pessimism abroad in the political circles of the world these days over the degree of real effectiveness of the United Nations. The Organization is often accused of having no teeth. This is why we, as representatives, must take a penetrating look at ourselves. We have been entrusted with the task of meeting together and thrashing out our problems. If we have the will to roll up our sleeves and tackle these problems with the determination that our majority decisions shall be supported by all Members of the United Nations, and then see to it that such support is given, we will have done our duty. If we fail, we will have failed the world. We will have shown that we are in fact an Organization without teeth, and that we, as representatives, are useless.
174.	Virtually all the nations assembled here today can boast of histories, either remote or recent, of grandeur and great military pride. But the brutal pages of those histories give us ominous warning that inexorable fate is waiting just off-stage while today’s drama is being enacted. Whether countries are momentarily strong or weak, physically large or small or industrially great or not is of very little importance in today’s world. Each of us has a voice and a place to be heard — that is important. We have voluntarily founded and joined this world-wide Organization that has the power to make us or break us.
175.	The United Nations, far from being toothless, possesses in its very structure the most terrible weapon the world has ever known. That weapon is not a police force; it is not the use of violence of any kind. It is simply concerted action by all Members of the United Nations, when a rebellious Member flouts the Assembly’s majority decision, A united world-wide economic boycott against the offender will do more than anything else to make him see the gravity of his mistake. We need determined unity. With that we can solve all problems.
176.	I hope a United Nations boycott will never have to be called against a Member nation. But let us not forget that it is there, like fate, waiting.
177.	I have mentioned the pessimism that exists today in the political circles of the world. But I have not mentioned the great upsurge of hope that is sweeping through the peoples of the world. They are looking to us. In desperation they are placing their trust in us. If we fail them, we will have failed a sacred trust; we will be less than useless as men, and as members of this great, united body. We have a job to do. We must sweep aside uncertainty and hesitancy and accomplish that job with all speed. The peoples of the world are waiting.
