In taking part in this general debate, I am happy to pay my respects to Prince Wan Waithayakon, a renowned figure in the United Nations by reason of his experience and eminent qualities and the distinguished representative of a country which has always expended its best efforts in the cause of peace. In expressing its satisfaction at his election, the Venezuelan delegation is certain that under his skillful leadership the eleventh session of the General Assembly will find a successful solution for the important and complex problems before it.
131.	The admission of new States to the United Nations is of special significance. My delegation is very pleased to note that this Assembly has been joined by the representatives of those States, some of which are linked to us by ancient and cordial ties of friendship. We are confident that we can expect a useful contribution from these new Members.
132.	We are beginning our labours in the midst of great concern about the events which the world has witnessed during the last few weeks. We can state that in the eleven years of its existence the United Nations has never passed through such a severe trial as during the last few days, when there has been imminent danger of a complete break-down of international peace and security. But I firmly believe that the prompt action taken by the Organization has succeeded in establishing an international police force which will stop any conflict in the Middle East, the scene of so much unrest in recent times.
133.	World public opinion has watched our proceedings closely and has seen in the United Nations the proper means for securing the peace for which it longs. It has been thought, perhaps rightly, that the implementation of the measures taken by this Assembly will depend on the strength of the nations which support them. We should not let this discourage us; on the contrary, if the countries of limited military power, which represent the majority, act together within this Organization, they will always constitute a moral force in international policy which the Governments of the other countries cannot disregard.
134.	The United Nations is day by day assuming greater responsibilities, since it is a gathering point for world problems, many of which are difficult to solve because they conceal interests which are guarded by the might of great States. At other times, legitimate national aspirations clash with legitimate international obligations. Owing to the inherent defects of the Organization itself and the constitutional errors by which a few of its Members have been allowed privileges, to the detriment of the principle of the legal equality of States, the United Nations has been obliged to postpone substantive decisions in questions which are of fundamental importance for the attainment of the objectives proposed at San Francisco.
135.	Despite those errors, these problems could be Solved if there were, as there should be, mutual confidence among all the Member States. Such confidence, a result of the mutual respect which we owe each other, would make it much easier to take positive and helpful decisions for our peoples. We represent seventy-nine Governments, which are the political expression of seventy-nine States. If we unite our efforts, we shall attain the goal at which we aim.
136.	It is true that the United Nations does not possess all the means for maintaining international peace and security which are provided in the Charter, but when necessary its decisions have received sufficient support to stop coercive action taken outside the Organization. Consequently no other methods should be resorted to for the settlement of international disputes. There exists a complete system of peaceful means of settlement which are recognized by international law and confirmed by the Charter. If there were confidence in these peaceful means, and if the Members of the United Nations were prepared to take disinterested, collective action, there would be no difficulty in settling disputes between States.
137.	For this reason, the American nations have acted in complete accord in the two cases upon which the attention of the world has been concentrated in the last few days. Thanks to long experience, our continent today possesses a regional juridical system of rules and principles which is so objective that it has even Served as a model for international law as a whole. From the time of Bolivar, the Liberator, to the present day, illustrious sons of our countries have worked to perfect the inter-American system. Barely fifty years ago, when excessive financial indemnities were forcibly demanded of my country, the American continent rebelled against that imposition and echoed the calm and resolute words of Luis Maria Drago, author of one of the noblest doctrines ever to enrich the corpus of American international law. For us it is a fundamental principle that no nation, whatever its geographic situation or political creed, may arrogate to itself the right to judge other peoples in their domestic affairs.
138.	These are sufficient reasons to make my delegation act objectively in these cases. Venezuela, in the person of its Liberator, contributed to the independence of other countries, so that by history and tradition it is opposed to any form of intervention, from whatever source, and to any act against the political independence and territorial integrity of a State.
139.	The Government and people of Venezuela were deeply shocked by the action of the Soviet forces against Hungary, concerning which my delegation gave its views in the meetings of the General Assembly at which the tragic fate that has overtaken the brave Hungarian people was discussed. The unjustifiable intervention to which that country, with its noble cultural traditions, has been subjected has shaken the civilized world, which in one way or another has shown its sympathy for Hungary’s aspirations towards independence. Moreover, side by side with the efforts made to win for this people the right of self-determination, many States, moved by humanitarian impulses, have taken steps to relieve the need and suffering which prevail in Hungary today.
140.	In connexion with these plans for relief, I should like to inform the Assembly once again that the Government of Venezuela, as an expression of its, sympathy and solidarity with the Hungarian people, has decided to help towards the alleviation of their sufferings by admitting a total of 1,500 refugees to Venezuela and by granting the equivalent of $50,000 to be Spent in a manner already announced officially to the Secretary-General [A/3405].
141.	It is essential that the United Nations should undertake a searching analysis of the conditions which result in such disturbances as those I have described. The economic and social development of nations should be a fundamental concern of the international community. After restoring peace in the Middle East, it would be well for us to try and solve the political problems of that important area by making a thorough study of the causes of the disturbances there.
142.	In view of the various conflicting interests, the work of the United Nations would be very limited if it were to do no more than deal with the more obvious manifestations of international conflicts. Even as far back as the San Francisco Conference it was thought that, besides taking corrective action in critical situations, the United Nations should engage in more far-reaching action to resolve difficulties in the very sphere where they arise. To achieve this end, over and above the security functions with which the United Nations was endowed for the maintenance and, if necessary, the restoration of peace, principles of lasting validity were established for the wellbeing and stability of the world. This action was described, in the words of the Charter itself, as “necessary” for peaceful and friendly relations among nations. The promotion of well-being, in its various forms, appeared to the founders of the United Nations to be the most effective way of dealing with international disturbances. This is the most promising and dynamic function which the United Nations can perform.
143.	That is how the Government which I have the honour to represent understands the matter. Its efforts to promote human welfare, in both the domestic and the international sphere, are well known. At the national level, desirous of promoting the well-being of the population Mr. Marcos Perez Jimenez, the President of Venezuela, has taken resolute steps to bring about, within a short time, a fundamental transformation in the economic, social and cultural life of Venezuela.
144.	In the international field, the Government of Venezuela, is convinced that the achievement of human Welfare in its various forms will contribute effectively to creating a spirit of solidarity and peaceful relations among peoples; that it why it has co-operated indefatigably in all plans for the attainment of those objectives. Quite recently, during the meeting in Panama of the Heads of State of the American republics, the President of Venezuela proposed the creation of an inter-American economic fund to be devoted entirely to the most urgent needs connected with the welfare of the inhabitants of our continent. In so doing, the Government of Venezuela was inspired not only by the lofty principles of co-operation which characterize the inter-American system, but also by those upon which the United Nations is based.
145.	My delegation is of the opinion that the United Nations has not exploited all the possibilities of cooperation in the economic and social Adds. The fact of interdependence is certainly well understood by now, but it has not yet become a living, active force. Vast regions with undoubted possibilities for development are still awaiting the life-giving spark of technical knowledge and the necessary capital investment. In other regions there is some uncertainty about trade. All would benefit by collective action aimed at the complete development of their existing resources.
146.	The total wealth of mankind in the economic, social and cultural fields would reach unsuspected heights if dense populations of the under-developed regions could be finally incorporated into the rhythm of contemporary civilization and its standards of living. The Very fate of mankind is at stake here, and although it is true that this work of incorporation calls for action and good will at the national level, it is also true that this action and good will will fail if they are not backed up by the sincere encouragement and the effective and united support of the international community.
147.	One of the questions to which the Government of Venezuela has paid most attention has been that of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Today, when the agency proposed by President Eisenhower has become a reality, when nuclear energy placed at the service of men may free men from the fear in which they have been living, when the transformation of this terrible power of destruction into a constructive force can bring untold benefits to humanity, we should all work together to achieve those objectives.
148.	The Venezuelan delegation expressed itself in those terms at the recent Conference on the Statutes of the International Atomic Energy Agency in this very hall, and I am pleased to confirm its views before the General Assembly today. All the delegations represented at that conference were able to appreciate the objective of international co-operation that inspires the Government of my country. My Government is taking special interest in the research work now being done in the national institutes which were set up for that purpose, with the object not only of improving the health and meeting the needs of the Venezuelan people, but also of meeting the requests of other countries which may ask for scientific and technical co-operation.
149.	Venezuela is taking part in this eleventh session of the General Assembly with the sincere purpose of co-operating in all fields in which efforts are being made to enable mankind to enjoy a lasting atmosphere of peace.
