It is a great pleasure for the delegation of Yemen to congratulate Prince Wan Waithayakon on his unanimous election to the presidency of the eleventh session of the General Assembly. We do not need to enumerate his high qualifications, which make him more than worthy of this august position, because they are well known by all.
186.	For eleven years, since the establishment of the United Nations, the eyes of the peoples of the world, especially the weak and the subjugated peoples, have been focused on this Organization with great hopes and high expectations for a better life, where every nation could live in peace and enjoy the benefits of freedom and independence and respect for its inalienable human rights. Unfortunately, these hopes have been shattered lately by numerous grave and dangerous events, especially those which hate occurred during the past few weeks.
187.	The delegation of Yemen approaches the opening of the eleventh session of the General Assembly with mixed feelings of hope and concern. For we now convene under the spectre of those grave events which, as far as the international situation is concerned, affect very deeply the small nations as much as the big nations. We are hopefully optimistic about the wise steps and prompt action which have been taken by the General Assembly to stop the aggression perpetrated against Egypt. These steps enhance our trust and belief in the influence of the Organization and its determination to stand by and implement the resolutions which have been and will be adopted to serve the ends of justice and maintain the peace.
188.	On the other hand, the very fact of aggression perpetrated by permanent members of the Security Council and by a State created by the United Nations is in itself a source of grave concern. But our hope is still high that the aggressors will not be able to procrastinate in complying with the orders of the General Assembly to withdraw from the invaded territory of Egypt and from the other territories of Palestine which have also been subject to invasion. If they do not, they must bear the responsibility of the fatal consequences of their aggressive policies, which will surely endanger the peace of the world.
189.	In the opinion of my delegation, the liquidation of this unjustified and unprovoked aggression must be given priority on the agenda of the eleventh session, especially since complete compliance with the resolutions of the General Assembly has not been effected. Potential and future aggressors should be made to understand that the decisions of this Organization must be respected, and that this institution of mankind will never tolerate or acquiesce in aggression by whomsoever it is committed. The United Nations will not hesitate to take appropriate measures so that its orders for the prompt and unconditional withdrawal of invading forces are obeyed. For what is the use of deliberations and resolutions of this Organization if they are ignored by Members that were endowed at, San Francisco with special privileges, and therefore special responsibilities? What is the value of all our talks here if some Member nations take the liberty of behaving in a manner contrary to the decisions of the United Nations?
190.	I shall explain in brief the position of the Government of Yemen in regard to some of the items on the agenda of the eleventh session which are of special interest and concern to us.
191.	First permit me to state that the stand of my Government in regard to colonialism is inflexible. The infringement of our sovereignty by the United Kingdom in the British-occupied territories of Yemen, and the constant frictions to which this infringement has given rise, is a matter which cannot remain unresolved without grave consequences. The Government of Yemen hopes that the British Government will give serious consideration to the removal of the causes of tension in that area, such as the illegal occupation of Yemenite territory and the frequent perpetration of aggressive acts by the British authorities in Aden, and to the establishment of peaceful relations between the two Governments on the basis of respect for our rights, sovereignty and national security.
192.	French intransigence in Algeria and the continued disregard by France of the sacred rights of the Algerian people violates the principles of human rights and the right of peoples to self-determination, and contradicts the principles of justice and law. My delegation hopes that the General Assembly during this session will give serious consideration to the solving of this problem, which no doubt jeopardizes the reputation of the French Government throughout the world. Efforts are being made to settle other important problems, but the importance of those problems must not overshadow the Algerian problem with its atrocities, bloodshed and disregard for the rights of a whole nation of several millions of human beings.
193.	My delegation appeals to all Members of the United Nations to protect the usurped rights of these millions of Algerians and to listen to their appeals for justice and peace. The Algerians’ demands are not illegitimate claims which would deprive other peoples of their rights, nor do they ask for gain or for special privileges in the international field. All the Algerian people want is to live in freedom and in peace and security in their homes, families and lands.
194.	The delegation of Yemen appeals again to the friends of France to use their good offices with the Government of France for a just solution of the Algerian problem and for the release of the Algerian leaders who were illegally kidnapped while flying over the Mediterranean on a peaceful mission. The solution of this problem during this session will save Algeria from further bloodshed and destruction, which resulted from postponing the consideration of the Algerian problem at the last session.
195.	The settlement of the problem of West Irian is very much desired by all. We see no Reason why this land should not be restored to its mother country and to the people with whom it has geographic and ethnic ties.
196.	In regard to the problem of Cyprus, we appeal to the authorities concerned to facilitate the settlement of this problem by taking into consideration the right of the people of Cyprus to self-determination.
197.	These two problems have given rise to international tension, and it is our duty to eliminate any tension which endangers the peace.
198.	The problem of the Middle East stems from the aggressive policy and the repeated aggressive acts of Israel. This is the root of the disturbance of the peace in that area. Israel should not have been allowed to interfere with Egypt’s sovereignty and legal rights as regards the Canal or any other part of Egyptian territory. Consequently, all its forces should completely withdraw from Egyptian territory in advance of any solution. Then, all problems should be solved by peaceful means.
199.	We heard the delegation of Israel direct fabricated accusations and recriminations at the Arab States, but we never heard them mention or even give a thought to the pitiful plight of the one million Arab refugees who have been driven out of their homes, who live in the desert, and who are exposed to the elements and to various diseases. Neither did we hear them mention the illegal occupation — which was in flagrant violation of the resolutions of the United Nations — by their countrymen of the land that belonged by right to the Arabs.
200.	In any event, we did not expect that Israel would ever comply with those resolutions, but we did expect that the United Nations would never acquiesce in the disregard of violations of its resolutions. We are gratified that this Organization is taking a keen interest in helping the Hungarian refugees, but at the same time we find that the lack of interest in the rights of the Palestine Arab refugees is a serious matter. The problem of the Middle East has become a source of international tension, and it is not possible to find a solution to this problem unless Israel complies with the various resolutions adopted by the General Assembly for this purpose. We wish that those who talk about peace would act in favour of peace.
