It is my privilege to express to you, Mr. President, the congratulations of the Afghanistan delegation on your election, which was so justly and unanimously voted by this Assembly. It is also my privilege to extend to my fellow representatives the greetings of the Royal Afghan Government, as well as its sincerest wishes for the success of the current session of the General Assembly.
41.	Our attachment to the United Nations and its Charter and principles and our complete adherence to the principles of human rights and self-determination of the peoples not only are based on ideological grounds but also result from our long experience as a free and small country in the controversial events of modern history. We believe that the peace of the world can be secured only on those bases, and we are certain that our future prosperity depends on peace. In saying that, we are not posing as moralists but, on the contrary, are in all humility expressing our conviction that our fellow Member States are as attached to those principles as we are.
42.	The attitude of the Afghanistan delegation at previous sessions of the Assembly has been inspired by those principles, and that will continue to be the case during the current session. This attitude is not characterized by any kind of opposition towards any country or group of countries, or by any idea which is different from the basic ideal of the United Nations that is, that there should be no distinction among Member States based on geographical considerations.
43.	This world has been the scene of tremendous evolution in the last twelve years. The nationalist movements of the African and Asian continents have been as natural as those of the European and American continents during the last century. Thus, if we have supported those movements, it has been only on the basis of an objective appreciation of that fact and because of our sincere desire that the problems of the world should be settled by mutual understanding and goodwill, and not by violent reactions and bloodshed. We likewise follow the same line today, without an antagonistic or fanatical feelings towards any other country.
44.	The independence of the Federation of Malaya and its admission to the United Nations constitute one of the best examples, not only of the justification of the rightful aspirations of a great nation but also of the generous gesture and appreciation of a great Power, the United Kingdom. Both of them are to be sincerely congratulated, and their examples should be followed in similar cases.
45.	We realize that the United Nations has had its difficulties and that present world problems are considered from many perspectives. We also realize that human problems are very complicated, that national political and economic problems play their role, and that each individual problem cannot be regarded in complete detachment from the currents of world problems. Notwithstanding these difficulties, however, there is no reason why we should not appreciate more the normal evolution of the world.
46.	Fortunately, we realize that this great Organization, through the zeal of its eminent Secretary-General and its devoted officials, has gone forward along the path traced for it twelve years ago. This is a cause for hope and an evidence of progress; and we believe that through our devotion and adherence to the principles and spirit of the Charter we shall gradually overcome many other difficulties.
47.	Our optimism is based on the consciousness of the peoples of the world that, if we are to have peace, there is no alternative but ultimately to identify our respective policies with the spirit of the Charter. Each and every one of us is convinced that another war would bring nothing but the complete annihilation of all that is good, worth-while and beautiful in life - and perhaps of life itself.
48.	We Afghans have no other ambition that to preserve our freedom and to try to ensure the prosperity of our own people in order that they may live as a modern nation in this world. We are attached to our traditions and our spiritual legacy as well as to our Constitution, which is the spontaneous outgrowth of the nature of our own country. We are trying to preserve them, and we are ready, as we have always been, to defend our freedom and integrity - and not only by words. Fortunately, the stability of our position and the sincerity of our neutrality have been tested and proved in the last fifth years, and especially during the two world wars. To develop and modernize our country we need the support and assistance of more developed countries, and we are grateful to receive such aid.
49.	We greatly appreciate the technical assistance we have received from the United Nations; we appreciate it for its own value, as well as for the opportunity it has given us for closer co-operation with this world Organization.
50.	Afghanistan believes in the peaceful settlement of international differences and problems, great or small. We have tried in the past, with success, to settle many of our own problems through direct negotiations, the use of good offices, the advice and technical help of our friends, and other peaceful means of conciliation. We are trying now, and shall try in the future, to settle our other problems  by the same means, on the basis of objective, unprejudiced consideration and the principles of right and justice.
51.	In our view, as regards all problems of the world where conflicts arise, the ultimate reference of the unsettled problems should be, if ether conciliatory means of settlement fail, to the United Nations and the International Court of Justice. We have many important problems on our agenda this year which will be debated during the present session. The future of the world and the preservation of international peace depend on them. We hope, like everyone here, that those problems will find a satisfactory and just solution in the spirit of the United Nations Charter. To that end we are prepared to contribute in our modest way to facilitating such a solution.
