The present session of the General Assembly is taking place at a very important stage in international developments. Although some improvement has taken place since the last session, the situation is tense and complex. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Albania expresses the hope that the work of the General Assembly will contribute to an improvement of this situation and to the strengthening of peace, co-operation and friendship among nations.
28.	Twelve years have elapsed since the end of the Second World War but it has not yet been possible to establish a stable peace. Mankind is now threatened with the danger of another war, one in which nuclear weapons will be used. In our opinion, the most characteristic and most ominous feature of this state of tension is the continuing armaments race. This is a result of the policy of the "cold war", of negotiation from a "position of strength" and of aggressive military blocs, a policy which the big western Powers - and first and foremost, the United States of America - adopted immediately after the Second World War for the purpose of imposing their will on the rest of the world. This policy culminated last year in the aggression against Egypt and in the organization of a counter-revolution in Hungary, and it is now a serious threat to the peace in the Near and Middle East.
29.	All nations are concerned, and rightly so, about the present state of affairs: they want peace and not war; they are convinced that war is not inevitable; they are convinced that it can and must be avoided. They nurture the hope that the United Nations will play a positive part in the achievement of this all-important objective.
30.	There is general agreement that disarmament is the principal, the vital problem of our times. The future of mankind and the choice between war and peace depend on the attitude which the various countries, and especially the great Powers, adopt with respect to this problem.
31.	The armaments race is having a serious effect on the economies of the various countries and on all international relations. New weapons, especially nuclear weapons, one more lethal than the other, are being invented every day. A new war in which such devices were used would most certainly result in innumerable casualties and incalculable material damages throughout the world.
32.	The peoples of the world insist on the end of the armaments race and on disarmament. This problem has been under discussion for over ten years, but no agreement has been reached. Continuing its unremitting efforts to reach agreement and showing a willingness to meet the proposals of the western Powers members of the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission, the USSR Government, at the recent session in London, presented new specific proposals which could easily be carried out and which, if adopted, would represent an important step towards eliminating the danger of atomic warfare.
33.	These proposals have been favourably received by public opinion and have given rise to legitimate hopes. The positive attitude of the Soviet Union has been reaffirmed before the Assembly by Mr. Gromyko, head of the USSR delegation at the present session. The memorandum on certain partial measures in the field of disarmament which he submitted on behalf of his Government [A/C. 1/793] represents, at the present juncture a precise programme for dealing with the principal aspects of this serious problem. However, neither in London nor here has the United States of America or the United Kingdom shown any real desire to reach agreement on this subject.
34.	The Soviet delegation has placed before the General Assembly certain simple and clear proposals; are the United States and the United Kingdom willing, or are they not, to agree on the discontinuance under international control of tests of nuclear weapons for a period of two or three years? Are they willing, or are they not, to agree to a reduction in armed forces, armaments and military expenditures to the extent they themselves previously proposed? Are they willing, or are they not, to give a solemn undertaking, together with the Soviet Union, that they will not use nuclear weapons, if only for a five-year period, should no final agreement be reached in the interim?
35.	The peoples want clear and affirmative replies to these questions. Yet Mr. Dulles, the representative of the United States, saw fit to speak in his statement not about prohibiting nuclear weapons but about perfecting them, and about the need for continuing the tests. A similar attitude was adopted by Sir Selwyn Lloyd, the United Kingdom representative. These gentlemen also mentioned the proposals which they had presented earlier in London. However, these proposals call neither for a reduction in armaments nor for a prohibition of nuclear weapons. On the contrary, being a reflection of unresolved political problems, they do not point the way towards disarmament but are designed merely to conceal from public opinion the negative attitude of these Powers.
36.	The People’s Republic of Albania, like all other peace-loving countries, has a very special interest in the problem of disarmament because it wants to ensure a good life for its people, who have suffered so much from foreign wars and invasions in the past. The Albanian Government has already carried out a substantial reduction in the armed forces of the Republic. We cannot, however, ignore the fact that NATO military bases, equipped with atomic weapons, are located in countries near Albania and that units of the United States Sixth Fleet and of other NATO countries are prowling about and. carrying out manoeuvres in the Adriatic and Ionian Seas, close to our territorial waters.
37.	At the same time, the military leaders of the countries which belong to this aggressive bloc are making challenging statements and a hostile propaganda campaign is being waged against the People’s Republic of Albania. What we want in the Balkans and in the Mediterranean - and for that matter, throughout the world - is the establishment of friendly relations, co-operation and mutual confidence among States. We believe than an agreement on disarmament, even a partial one, would promote such a state of affairs.
38.	Our delegation, on behalf of the Albanian Government, supports the proposal of the Soviet Union calling for an agreement to discontinue the tests of nuclear weapons for a period of two or three years. This proposal should be considered as a separate item at the present session of the General Assembly. We are convinced that the conclusion of an agreement on this specific problem by the three Powers which possess nuclear weapons would open the door to other disarmament agreements and would mark a turning point in the international situation as a whole.
39.	It is an established fact that the tests of nuclear weapons have increased the amount of radioactive substances in the atmosphere. In the opinion of many prominent scientists, this increased radioactivity is a threat to the health of future generations. We believe that it would be most useful for the General Assembly to consider the effects of atomic radiation, an item proposed by Czechoslovakia.
40.	We do not agree with those who feel that in the present circumstances no solution of the disarmament question is possible. It is true that great differences of opinion exist and that the lack of mutual confidence resulting from the "cold war” is a major obstacle to agreement. Must we, however, retreat from obstacles instead of attempting to overcome them? The interests of peace, the vital interests of the human race require that all countries, and especially the great Powers, should make a sincere and sustained effort towards gradually restoring confidence by means of agreements relating to specific aspects of the disarmament problem and other problems. As we see it, such a procedure is not only possible but essential. We believe that the disarmament proposals submitted by the Soviet Union represent a sound and acceptable basis for agreement. The Albanian Government is in favour of all the proposals included in the Soviet Government's memorandum on certain partial measures in the field of disarmament and it hopes that they will meet with widespread support on the part of the other delegations. It also hopes that the General Assembly will endorse these proposals and thereby justify the peoples’ confidence in the United Nations,
41.	In their statements during the general debate, several representatives expressed justified concern over the tension in the Near and Middle East, a tension which may easily Increase. It is hardly a year since an Arab country, Egypt, fell victim to unprovoked aggression on the part of the United Kingdom, France and Israel. Today, other Arab countries are the target of hostile acts by the principal NATO Powers. For years, a positive war of extermination has been waged against the heroic people of Algeria who are struggling for their freedom and national independence. Acts of aggression have been committed against Yemen, which is a Member of the United Nations. In Oman, the national liberation movement has met with savage repression. At the present moment, Syria, another independent and peaceful Arab country and also a Member of the United Nations, is being plotted against, subjected to pressure and threatened by the United States of America. The Syrian people and their Government have frustrated, and will always frustrate, the threats and provocations of the imperialists. Their just cause has won the sympathy of all peace-loving countries. The Albanian people express their solidarity with the people of Syria and condemn the aggressive policies of the United States towards the Syrian Republic. The Albanian people feel close to the Arab peoples, whom they regard as brothers. We and the Arab peoples are friends and neighbours. We are united by common customs and traditions and by historic bonds forged, in the struggle for freedom, independence and peace.
42.	In speaking from this rostrum, Mr. Dulles, the United States Secretary of State, interfered without a qualm in Syria's domestic affairs and accused it of threatening neighbour countries. He also accused the Soviet Union of interfering in the domestic affairs of Syria. The Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom spoke in the same vein and developed the same arguments. But is it possible to separate last year's aggression against Egypt from the policy by which the principal members of the Atlantic bloc are now threatening Syria? Who is in a better position to evaluate the situation in Syria and the neighbouring countries: the United States Government or the Government of Syria and the Governments of the neighbouring countries, which declare that Syria constitutes no threat to these countries?
43. Last Saturday, for instance, a spokesman for the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that Iraq was not concerned about recent events in Syria and did not believe that Syria could launch an attack against other Arab countries. The day before yesterday, a spokesman for the Government of Jordan said that the Arabs did not believe that Syria was a military threat to any other country. The Arab States have even declared their readiness to co-operate with Syria in warding off any dangers by which it might be threatened.
44.	The Syrian Government, for its part, has stated on several occasions that the only threat to its country came from imperialism. Whenever the imperialists plan or carry out an act directed against the peace and freedom of nations, they attempt to lay the blame for it on the Soviet Union. This is what they tried to do when they committed aggression against Egypt. It is what they are trying to do in the case of Syria. But these tactics are outworn and no longer effective: the peoples come to know their friends by what they do, not what they say.
45.	The great Powers of the Atlantic bloc have turned their attention to the Near and Middle East in an effort to regain positions of power, win control of oil deposits, thwart the peoples still suffering under the colonial yoke in their fight for national freedom, and secure strategic bases in that area.
46.	The United States calls itself a friend of the Arab peoples, but what are the facts? Who does not know that the United Kingdom and France, in their war against Egypt, made extensive use of American arms supplied through NATO? Who furnishes weapons to Israel and supports and encourages it in its fight against the Arab countries ? Who does not know that the war against the Algerian people is supported by the entire Atlantic bloc, and that American weapons supplied by NATO are being used to kill Algerians? Has the United States denounced the United Kingdom’s acts of aggression against Yemen and Oman? Is it not obvious that the present campaign against Syria is co-ordinated within the framework of NATO under United States direction?
47.	The recent events in Syria were not well received at Washington. The United States Government was naturally not pleased that the Syrian Government should have discovered and thwarted its plot and taken the necessary measures to protect its country’s independence and sovereignty. It was even alleged in Washington that the situation in Syria endangered the interests of the United States of America. The truth is that Washington is displeased because Syria has resolved to safeguard and strengthen its national independence and to follow a policy of active neutrality and does not wish to accept the United States colonialist plan known as the Eisenhower doctrine. It is our opinion that the United States of America has no earthly right to tell Syria or any other country what policy it should follow. That is a usurpation of one of the prerogatives of national sovereignty.
48.	The Government of the People’s Republic of Albania maintains that it is the lawful right of the countries of the Near and Middle East, as it is of all other countries, to live in freedom and independence according to their desire, traditions and aspirations. Our Government believes that acceptance by the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France of the well-known proposals made to them by the Soviet Government, by which they would agree not to use force in their relations with countries of the Near and Middle East and not to interfere in their domestic affairs, would be the first step towards relaxing the tension in that area. We sincerely hope that the dark clouds lowering over the Middle East will soon be dispelled and that the Arab peoples will be able to live and work in peace and freedom.
49.	Recent events have once again made it evident that disputes between nations cannot be settled by force and that the "cold war” and negotiation from a "position of strength" policy has succeeded only in straining international relations and endangering peace. Such a policy is incompatible with the lofty purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the higher interests of peoples. We believe that the United Nations should devote all its efforts, and take advantage of every opportunity, to establish international relations on a fair basis, encourage pacific settlement of existing disputes and create mutual trust among nations.
50.	The Soviet delegation has submitted to the General Assembly a draft declaration on the principles of peaceful co-existence between States [A/3673]. The principles of peaceful co-existence are well known; they are the basis of the foreign policy of a large number of countries and have become recognized principles of international law. It is to be hoped that the General Assembly will adopt these principles, thus helping to relax tension and creating a useful tool for the solution of controversial questions and the strengthening of co-operation among States.
51.	In the opinion of our delegation, the attempts by certain Member States to use the United Nations for their own purposes and in the pursuit of their "cold war" policy have dimmed the prestige of the United Nations and are hampering its operation. We consider that the arbitrary inclusion in the agenda of the present session of a controversial item known as the "Hungarian question" not only is a violation of one of the fundamental principles of the Charter in that it constitutes intolerable interference in the domestic affairs of tine People’s Republic of Hungary, but also is bound to harm the cause of the United Nations and of international co-operation. Instead of wasting time on this non-existent question, the United Nations should give its undivided attention to the many real and urgent problems which are before it for solution.
52.	Again, the legitimate rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations have not yet been restored, because of the obstructionist attitude of the United States of America. It is our opinion that any delay in recognizing these rights is harmful only to the prestige and effectiveness of the United Nations. It will, moreover, in no way alter the course of events in China or the resolute and rapid progress of that great country of 600 million people along the path of socialism, nor will its authority as a great world Power be in the least affected. The United Nations has placed itself in a position which is as unfair to it as to China. How can it take effective action in the absence of the true representatives of a people which constitutes one-fourth of all mankind? We believe that it is high time to restore to the People's Republic of China its inalienable rights in the United Nations.
53.	One of the most important principles of the United Nations is the principle of universality. Agreement regarding its application has made possible the admission of a large number of countries during the last few years, and this constitutes a great success for the United Nations. However, we are unable to understand why this principle is not observed in the case of the Mongolian People’s Republic, an independent and democratic country which has declared its willingness to carry out the obligations contained in the Charter. The Albanian delegation hopes that this unjustified discrimination will soon end and that the Mongolian People's Republic will be admitted to the United Nations.
54.	On the agenda of the present session are several important problems relating to the freedom of peoples oppressed by colonialism, to the economic development of under-developed countries, and to the expansion of peaceful co-operation among States in the economic, cultural and social fields. Our delegation will endeavour to do its share in seeking a satisfactory solution for these problems.
55.	There is no doubt that much remains to be done to develop economic exchanges between countries with different systems. The artificial obstacles created, by certain western Powers have prevented a full exploration, to the mutual advantage of the parties concerned, of all the possibilities in this field. In these circumstances, the Soviet proposal to convene a world economic conference is of great importance and deserves universal support.
56.	The People’s Republic of Albania is fundamentally a peace-loving State, which desires to live in peace and friendship with all countries according to the principles of peaceful coexistence. The Albanian people has never transgressed against the rights of other peoples, and it is determined not to let anyone interfere with its freedom, its independence, and its legitimate rights.
57.	The Albanian people is progressing along the road to socialism. It devotes all its energy to economic and cultural progress and the peaceful development of its country. Thanks to its own efforts and to the brotherly aid of the Soviet Union and other peoples’ democracies, it has passed several important milestones along this road.
58.	We believe that the defence of peace is an essential prerequisite for the further development of our country. Therefore the Albanian people and Government have taken a resolute stand for peace and against war, and support unreservedly the efforts of the Soviet Union and other peace-loving countries to halt the armaments race, ban the use, production and testing of nuclear weapons, secure disarmament and replace the policy of mutually-antagonistic military blocs by a general system of collective security, so that relations among countries, whatever their social system, may be based upon the principles of peaceful coexistence.
59.	The friendship between the People’s Republic of Albania and the Soviet Union and other socialist countries, founded upon principles of equality, mutual respect, non-interference, co-operation and fraternal aid, grows stronger each day and constitutes a valid guarantee for the future of our country and our people.
60.	The Albanian Government has endeavoured and continues to endeavour to improve and expand its relations with other countries, neighbours or otherwise, in accordance with the principles of peaceful coexistence. On that basis, it is prepared to establish normal diplomatic, economic, cultural and tourist relations with all countries desiring to maintain such relations with us. We believe that the strengthening of peaceful co-operation among all the Balkan States would be an excellent contribution to the cause of world peace. It was in this spirit and with this end in view that the Albanian Government accepted the invitation sent recently by the Government of the Romanian People's Republic to the heads of government of the Balkan countries.
61.	In conclusion, I should like once more to express the hope that the work of this session of the General Assembly will be successful and will serve the fundamental cause of the United Nations, which is that of international peace, co-operation and security.
