First of all, may I take this opportunity, on behalf of the Austrian delegation, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to this high office. Your personality, your long experience in the field of international co-operation, and your work in the United Nations ensure the successful guidance of the twelfth session of the General Assembly.
123.	Nor do I wish to allow this opportunity to pass without expressing our gratitude to the President of the eleventh session, Prince Wan Waithayakon, for the excellent manner in which he conducted the affairs of that session during a grave period in which the peace of the world was in peril. With our thanks, we should also like to extend to him our bent wishes for continued successful activity in the service of mutual understanding among the peoples of the world.
124.	Last year, when the Austrian delegation was able officially to participate for the first time in the work of the General Assembly, I declared [589th meeting], in the name of the Austrian Government and the Austrian people, that we would participate in a spirit of earnestness, fully aware of our responsibility in the activities of the United Nations, and willing to contribute our share towards the realization of the high ideals of this community of nations. Today, I can only reaffirm this pledge. We believe and have confidence in the United Nations which now, as before, we consider to be the best guarantee for the maintenance of peace and the realization of the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
125.	Although certain weaknesses have become apparent since the United Nations came into existence, I nevertheless believe I am justified in saying that the United Nations and its Secretary-General -- who, it is the hope of the Austrian delegation, will be re-elected — have given proof of their efficiency in mastering difficult situations. Without this Organization it would scarcely have been possible to solve the multitude of problems which have arisen, particularly within the past few years. It seems to us essential that each country should subordinate its own interests to the common interest, thereby creating an atmosphere of mutual confidence which may provide a firm foundation on which to build a happy and peaceful world.
126.	We had all hoped that such an atmosphere would bring to a successful conclusion the recent disarmament talks held by the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission in London. These talks seem to have failed for the time being. However, we do not believe that this means the end of discussions on disarmament. On the contrary, we feel that, during the discussions in London, for the first time in years concrete proposals were put forward and discussed and that both sides made serious efforts to bring the matter nearer to a solution.
127.	The General Assembly will deal with this matter in great detail at its twelfth session. It is understandable that the public, in view of the new weapons with their unimaginable consequences, is deeply concerned. We are happy to note that the proposals submitted in London were aimed at reducing this danger. Although, regrettably, no positive results have been achieved, a comparison of the different plans undoubtedly shows a certain rapprochement of the points of view. It will therefore be Important, during future negotiations in the United Nations, to continue to work in this direction, regardless of the difficulties that may arise.
128.	Austria has agreed to limitations of its arms potential in an international treaty, the Austrian State Treaty of 15 May 1955, which might well be considered the final goal of disarmament for other countries also. We are well aware that this limitation of our armaments is hardly of vital importance in relation to the power factors involved. We feel, however, that it is essential to start somewhere with disarmament. We believe we have made a valuable contribution in this respect towards understanding among the nations of the world. The great Powers bear a decisive responsibility — in the truest sense of the word -- for the future of the world.
129.	Although the question of disarmament must be regarded as one of the utmost urgency at present, it cannot be treated separately from all the other political problems facing the world, but must be viewed in conjunction with them. There are two major problems which are of crucial Importance to this forum. These are — and they are decisive for us all — the relationship between West and East on the one hand, and the birth of new, independent States on the other. This necessarily brings about a change in the political picture of the world. It is understandable that Austria is particularly interested in the first problem, since our country is situated on the crossroads between East and West. No country can be so greatly interested in a relaxation of tensions as Austria, for every aggravation of differences affects us directly or indirectly. Clear evidence of this is the stream of refugees still continuing across our borders.
130.	The General Assembly only recently took up the question of Hungary. During the debate [677th meeting]. The Austrian delegation suggested that, for humanitarian reasons, the responsible authorities in Budapest should grant a general amnesty to all those who, in connexion with the events in Hungary, have been arrested or sentenced. It was for humanitarian reasons that Austria, at a time when events in our neighbouring country held the world spellbound, acted in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. Today we again turn, for purely humanitarian reasons, to the responsible authorities in Hungary to ask that freedom be given to those who are still imprisoned and under sentence. We hope that this appeal will not remain unheard and that, in this part of the world also, we may witness a lessening of tensions.
131.	It is understandable that Austria is also interested in the fate of its neighbour to the West. The solution of the question of German unification would certainly be a decisive contribution towards a normalization and stabilization of conditions in Europe. Here, too, the free will of the people and their right to self-determination, as outlined in the Charter, must be the guiding principle.
132.	Although not immediately involved geographically, Austria was greatly interested in the peaceful solution of another problem. I am referring to the events in the Middle East with which the General Assembly was so much concerned last year.
133.	The fact that in the Far East actual fighting stopped years ago may also be cited as an encouraging development. We hope that in that area, too, definitive solutions will soon be found.
134.	Permit me to speak briefly of the other set of questions referred to above.
135.	It is unavoidable that through the emergence of new States the political situation of the world is undergoing changes. A great deal of patience and understanding and, above all, the gradual disappearance of distrust will be necessary to overcome differences that might arise in this connexion. I am convinced, however, that such differences will not be incapable of solution. Much will depend on the technical and economic assistance to be given to these young nations in order to facilitate their adjustment to the new world order. We regard such support as one of the foremost tasks of the United Nations.
136.	We in Austria have been particularly gratified to note that this year, too, a new Member has been admitted to the world Organization and I should like to extend to the youngest Member of the United Nations, the Federation of Malaya, our best wishes for a peaceful and successful future.
137.	Less than a year ago I appealed to the people of the world to make available new homes to the approximately 180,000 refugees who, as a result of the events in Hungary, had fled to Austria. In the name of the Austrian Government and the Austrian people I wish to thank most sincerely all those who helped these unfortunate victims of our time. Especially we would like to thank the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the High Commissioner himself for the active assistance and valuable support which enabled thousands of refugees to find life worth living again. Yet there are still more than 25,000 refugees waiting for a new home to be given to them. We are convinced that they will also be given a chance to begin a new life within a reasonable time.
138.	I thought that I should mention the problem of disarmament in the first place because it is one of the most important tasks of our time and that I should refer to the dangers to humanity which might result from the use of atomic weapons. But here, too, the United Nations has shown us a way out.
139.	On 1 October of this year, the first General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency will open in Vienna, and the object of this agency is the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. More than eighty nations have pledged their co-operation to this international agency and by so doing have manifested their willingness to work for the maintenance of peace and to help build a happier future for all mankind. Here is an opportunity to substitute deeds for words and to use the enormous sums which are required for the production of weapons of mass destruction for a better purpose. And here is also a possibility that real co-operation and tangible results may create an atmosphere of confidence that could have a beneficial influence on the efforts aimed at a reduction of armaments.
140.	Austria is proud to be host to the first General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and will prove Itself worthy of the honour, should Vienna be chosen to become the permanent site of the Agency. We fully realize that this would mean a great responsibility, but we shall do our best to further international co-operation and work towards mutual understanding. The city on the Danube still breathes the spirit of centuries of history and tradition and might well inspire a solemn thought, namely, that all power is transitory and that only the good, the noble and the beautiful create monuments that defy all time.
