Permit me first of all to congratulate the President on his election as President of the United Nations General Assembly. I should also like, on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation, to greet the General Assembly and to convey the hope of the Czechoslovak people that the work and accomplishments of this session will serve the cause of preserving peace, ensuring the peaceful coexistence of peoples and further increasing co-operation among them.
28.	I welcome the representatives of the Federation of Malaya to our midst and on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation and the entire Czechoslovak people I give the Malay people our good wishes and wish their Government every success in its efforts to promote peace and friendship among the peoples.
29. The international situation in which this session of the General Assembly is being held remains complex and is a source of grave concern. The efforts of the countries in the socialist camp, headed by the Soviet Union, and of other peace-loving countries, to reduce international tension, are encountering serious obstacles raised by the aggressive imperialist forces. The division of the world into hostile military groups and the continuation of the armaments race, particularly the atomic and hydrogen weapons race, constitute a standing threat to peace. Although the desire of the peoples to live in peace and to solve outstanding questions by peaceful means is asserting itself more and more, the fact remains that the desired atmosphere of trust and co-operation in the world has not yet been achieved.
30.	The United Nations, whose primary task is the maintenance of peace and security, must make every effort to avert the threat of an atomic war and do everything in its power to ensure that relations between States are based on the principle of peaceful coexistence.
31.	The desire of the peoples for peaceful co-operation is opposed by the policy of certain circles anxious to intensify the "cold war” and to keep the world poised on. the brink of war. Relying on the support of aggressive blocs, these circles continue to pursue a policy of negotiation from a "position of strength”, a policy of threatening and intimidating peace-loving peoples. They continue to establish and expand military bases and to station their forces and stockpile their war materials, including atomic and hydrogen weapons, in the territory of foreign States.
32.	The main instrument for military preparations at the present time is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). This is a hard fact that cannot be altered either by attempts to present NATO in sheep's clothing, as Mr. Lloyd, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom, attempted to do in his statement this morning, or by slanders against the peace-loving European countries, including the Czechoslovak Republic. At its session this summer, the Council of this aggressive organization decided to supply the NATO countries with United States atomic weapons and to establish atomic bases, particularly in the territory of West Germany. Under their plans West Germany is to become a base for atomic warfare against the peace-loving countries.
33.	"Cold war" methods are also being introduced into our Organization. The Czechoslovak delegation regrets that, in connexion with the consideration of the so-called question of Hungary, the United Nations, under pressure from the Western Powers, should have been drawn into the campaign of instigating hatred and hostility among peoples, thus seriously impairing its prestige.
34.	In recent years the enemies of peace and the freedom of peoples have been increasing their aggressive attacks against the growing popular liberation movement. The people and Government of Czechoslovakia sympathize deeply with the just struggle of these peoples to achieve freedom and to cast off the colonial yoke. The views that the Czechoslovak delegation will express during the consideration of the colonial questions on the agenda of the General Assembly will reflect this sympathy.
35.	A source of particular concern is the situation in the Near and Middle East where, owing to the activities of the imperialist Powers, new, grave conflicts are arising. The effects of the aggression against Egypt have not yet been eliminated, yet the General Assembly is again confronted with a serious threat in this area. The aggressive circles of the imperialist Powers, creating and maintaining tension and forcibly intervening in the domestic affairs of individual countries, contrary to the interests of the peoples of the Near and Middle East, are endeavouring to salvage what remains of their position in that area, to suppress the growing national-liberation struggle and to destroy the independence of the Arab countries as States and nations.
36.	Attempts have been made, last week by the United States delegation, and again today by the United Kingdom representative, to shift the blame for the tense situation in the Near and Middle East area onto the Soviet Union and the peace-loving Arab States. However, no hypocritical words can conceal the fact that United Kingdom forces, using modern military equipment, have for some months past been mounting systematic and barbarous attacks on Oman and Yemen. Nor can anything hide the aggressive activities of the United States against the Arab countries or the stockpiling of United States arms and the concentration of United States naval forces in this area.
37.	The ruling circles in the United States, giving currency to the allegation that Syria is threatening the security of neighbouring States, on the pretext of the so-called communist danger or using other fabricated excuses which have a strong smell of oil, have unleashed a campaign of pressure and open military threats against this courageous country, which is guilty only of refusing to obey the dictates of the United States monopolies.
38.	Syria is a peace-loving, independent State, which is resolutely defending its sovereignty and national freedom, and deserves the just admiration and active support of all peace-loving peoples, and, first and foremost, of the United Nations. Czechoslovakia, which maintains friendly and mutually advantageous relations with many Arab countries, condemns United States intrigues against the independence of Syria. The people of Syria and their righteous cause have the full sympathy and support of the Czechoslovak people.
39.	The present campaign of hatred and aggressive activities against the Arab countries, and especially against Syria, is the result of the so-called Eisenhower doctrine. Under this doctrine, which was enacted into law, the Government of the United States announced a programme of intervention in the domestic affairs of the sovereign States in the Near and Middle East, a programme for a new colonial enslavement of the Arab peoples, the implementation of which implies the use of United States armed forces. Owing to its aggressive character, this programme is a serious threat to peace and security not only in this area but throughout the world; it is a flagrant violation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations and is incompatible with the principles of peaceful coexistence and the development of friendly relations and co-operation among States.
40.	The Czechoslovak Government, in view of the serious situation that has arisen in this area, welcomes and fully supports the proposals of the Soviet Union which are designed to preserve peace and security in the Near and Middle East. Under these proposals, the four great Powers - the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom and France - would assume a solemn obligation to refrain from the use of force in the Near and Middle East and from intervention in the domestic affairs of the countries in this area. The assumption of such an obligation would help considerably to improve and restore to normal the situation in this area of the world and would thereby contribute to a relaxation of international tension.
41.	In the present international situation, particular importance attaches to the solution of the most urgent problem in the world today, the problem of disarmament and - related to it - the prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons. For more than ten years now, discussions have been proceeding in the United Nations on these questions to no avail. For a correct evaluation of United Nations work in the field of disarmament, we must refer to the principles governing the conclusion of an agreement on disarmament, set forth in two resolutions adopted unanimously by the General Assembly in 1946 and 1954 [resolutions 41 (I) and 808 (IX)]. Both these resolutions reveal a clear conception of what an agreement on disarmament should contain: it should provide for, first, a real limitation and major reduction of all armed forces and all conventional armaments, secondly, the total prohibition of the use and manufacture of nuclear weapons, and thirdly, the establishment of effective international control over the implementation of these measures. These principles are consistently followed in the proposals for a broad programme of disarmament presented by the Government of the Soviet Union at the London negotiations and at this session of the General Assembly.
42.	The proposals of the Soviet Union are imbued with a sincere desire to achieve a reduction of armaments and armed forces and the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction. The broad programme for the establishment of a system of international control, which includes proposals previously submitted by the Western Powers, offers an effective way of ensuring that an agreement for the reduction of armaments and the prohibition of thermo-nuclear weapons is observed and carried out.
43.	However, the USSR proposals, which in many respects are a compromise with proposals and ideas presented previously by the Western Powers, did not receive the support of the other members of the Subcommittee of the Disarmament Commission in London. This is because the Western Powers, contrary to the General Assembly’s recommendations on disarmament, for which they themselves voted, do not really wish to embark upon the course of effective disarmament. The discussions in the Sub-Committee have again shown that the Western Powers do not wish to renounce atomic and hydrogen weapons; they do not wish to renounce their use and eliminate them from the arsenals of States, because they regard these weapons as the basis of their policy and military strategy.
44.	In his speech on 22 July 1957, Mr. Dulles, Secretary of State of the United States, openly proclaimed the basis of the Western Powers’ disarmament policy. He declared that "No one is thinking about disarming the United States or the Soviet Union, or any other nation. What we are seeking is action in the field of armament which will reduce the danger of war."
45.	If the Western Powers are really proceeding from this standpoint, it is clear that no constructive solution of the disarmament problem can be achieved. Our efforts, too, are and must be directed towards reducing the danger of war, but this can never be achieved so long as the armaments race continues; it can be achieved only by reducing armaments and prohibiting atomic weapons. It seems, however - and the statement by the Secretary of State during the general debate merely confirms this - that the United States Government is not interested in the effective reduction of armed forces and that in no circumstances is it interested in the elimination of nuclear weapons. The United States Government does not intend to embark upon disarmament; it wishes to remain in the field of armaments. It is one of the lessons of history that this field produces war, not peace.
46.	In their proposals, the Western Powers avoid the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons and even try to legalize their use as a lawful means of waging war. According to their proposals, any agreement on the reduction of armed forces and conventional weapons must be preceded by a settlement of certain political questions. Their proposed system of control is divorced from the very basis of an agreement on disarmament and, like the previous proposals, constitutes an attempt to reach an agreement that would be advantageous to one side only. Such an approach, however, cannot yield any positive results. All these facts show that the proposals of the Western Powers do nothing to advance the disarmament negotiations, in spite of what the sponsors say, even at this session. The purpose of these proposals is to steer the negotiations into another impasse.
47.	The Czechoslovak delegation has on several occasions in the past emphasized that the fact that efforts to draw up a general programme of disarmament are at present encountering difficulties must not be used as a reason or pretext for blocking the whole issue. There are a large number of individual questions relating to disarmament the successful solution of which would help to break the deadlock on this question. In this connexion we must stress the great importance of the memorandum on partial measures in the field of disarmament, submitted by the Soviet Union on 20 September [A/C. 1/7931 for consideration by the General Assembly. The Czechoslovak delegation has studied this document carefully. It considers that the adoption of the measures proposed would constitute the necessary step forward in the search for a solution of the disarmament question and it therefore supports these proposals wholeheartedly.
48.	The USSR proposal that States possessing thermonuclear weapons would assume a solemn obligation not to use these weapons deserves careful study. All peoples would undoubtedly welcome a speedy and complete prohibition of the use of atomic weapons, but if this goal cannot be achieved owing to the refusal of the Western Powers, the Soviet proposal for the assumption of an obligation not to use such weapons for five years constitutes a sound basis for reaching agreement on this complicated problem. The adoption of this proposal would certainly help to improve the international situation. One of the most urgent demands of our time is for the discontinuance of tests of atomic weapons. The peoples of the world are deeply concerned at the continued tests of atomic and hydrogen weapons which constitute a threat to human life and health.
49.	The Czechoslovak delegation therefore welcomes the USSR delegation’s proposal that the question of the discontinuance of tests of atomic and hydrogen weapons under international control should be examined by this session of the General Assembly as an independent item. There is no doubt that even a temporary discontinuance of tests for two or three years, as proposed by the Soviet Union, would be a practical step towards the complete prohibition of thermonuclear weapons and would hamper further efforts to develop new and even more destructive thermonuclear weapons. Considering that control of the implementation of an agreement on the temporary discontinuance of tests would, as pointed out in the proposals submitted by the USSR, be relatively simple and very effective, the Czechoslovak delegation sees no reason why an agreement of this kind could not be reached at this twelfth session of the General Assembly.
50.	The composition of the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission has also been a factor contributing to its unsatisfactory work. Of the five members of the Sub-Committee, four play a leading role in the North Atlantic bloc, the whole policy of which is based on continuing the armaments race and preparing for a new war employing atomic and hydrogen weapons. The present composition of the Subcommittee and its secret discussions suit the purposes only of those who, with a view to deceiving and lulling world public opinion, wish to create the illusion that they are doing something with regard to disarmament, but are really not at all interested in achieving progress in this matter. The Czechoslovak delegation, like many others, is in favour of expanding the Disarmament Commission and its Sub-Committee ensuring that disarmament problems which concern all peoples are not discussed behind closed doors.
51.	I am convinced that a step forward can be taken with regard to disarmament at this session of the General Assembly. But the United Nations must deal with this problem vigorously and with a sense of its great responsibility for the maintenance and strengthening of peace and the relaxation of international tension.
52.	The attainment of an agreement on disarmament is a matter of great concern to the Czechoslovak Government. In its desire to provide concrete assistance in solving the disarmament problem, it has already twice reduced the level of its armed forces. With regard to so-called aerial photography, it has stated that, in the interests of reaching agreement on disarmament, it is prepared to agree to this measure, on the premise that the reduction of armaments would considerably lessen the threat of war and would make it possible to take measures of this kind without jeopardizing the security of our Republic.
53.	The question of collective security is closely connected with that of disarmament. As a State situated in Central Europe, Czechoslovakia is directly concerned with the achievement of this aim in Europe. The events which took place last year have shown that the problem of all-European security, to which the Czechoslovak delegation has already drawn attention at previous sessions, has become even more urgent at the present time. The situation in Europe has been further aggravated in the past year. In the territory of West Germany, more and more United States atomic bases are being established and the West German army is being feverishly built up. It is not by chance that fascist organizations are reappearing in various forms in West Germany and that former Nazi officers are again commanding the armed forces of that country. According to a statement made by Mr. Strauss, the West German Minister of Defence, in October 1956, thirty-one of the thirty-eight generals of the new German army served on Hitler’s general staff. At the same time, increasingly open threats are being made in the Federal Republic of Germany against its eastern neighbours.
54.	All European peoples, and especially the neighbours of the Federal Republic of Germany, are interested in ensuring security in Europe. Admittedly, the militarization of West Germany and the plans to supply its army with thermonuclear weapons are directed primarily against the socialist countries of Europe; but the history of two world wars has shown that German imperialism has never limited its aggression to the East and that its expansionist tendencies and desire for world mastery have always led to war against its Western neighbours also. The possibility of the use of weapons of mass destruction will merely encourage West German militaristic circles in their ambitions for revenge.
55.	The Czechoslovak delegation therefore expresses its agreement with the proposal in the USSR delegation’s memorandum on partial measures in the field of disarmament, to the effect that States possessing thermonuclear weapons should assume the obligation, under an appropriate agreement, not to allow the installation of atomic units or of any types of atomic or hydrogen weapons beyond their frontiers and should not place such weapons at the disposal of other States and of the commands of military blocs.
56.	In view of the existing situation in Europe, it is absolutely essential to make every effort, in the spirit of the principles of the United Nations Charter, to replace the policy of military blocs by a policy of mutual understanding, co-operation and collective security. There can be no doubt that implementation of the USSR proposal for the dissolution of both the North Atlantic Treaty and the Warsaw Treaty would substantially alter the international situation.
57.	The first step towards ensuring security in Europe might also be an agreement whereby the NATO countries and the Warsaw Treaty countries would undertake not to use force and to settle all disputes by peaceful means.
58.	The establishment of a system of collective security would also greatly facilitate the solution of the German problem. The Czechoslovak Government, which quite understandably has a great interest in this matter, considers that the establishment of a confederation of the two German States which exist today would be the most acceptable first step towards the establishment of a single, democratic and peace-loving Germany.
59.	One of the most important items on the agenda of the twelfth session is the danger constituted by the raising of the radiation level resulting from atomic test explosions. It is common knowledge that the number of radioactive particles, including strontium-90 particles, in the stratosphere is constantly increasing. These particles are carried around the world by air currents and are deposited on the earth’s surface. They may be deposited anywhere in the world, regardless of State frontiers. Science has proved that even if all experimental atomic explosions are discontinued forthwith strontium fall-out will continue for years to come and in ever-increasing quantities, reaching its maximum level by 1980. Eminent scientists and scientific institutes in many different countries of the world have shown that the rising level of radioactivity may constitute a biological threat to all life on earth. In these circumstances, it is essential for the General Assembly to draft concrete measures which will have the effect of stopping any further rise in the level of radioactivity. The Czechoslovak Government is convinced that such measures are possible. Prompted by a desire to help free mankind from the threat of such a disaster, it has submitted for consideration by the twelfth session a proposal to consider the question of the effects of atomic radiation.
60.	The General Assembly must discuss important economic problems, particularly the question of raising standards of living and of developing international economic and trade co-operation and the question of effective economic assistance to underdeveloped countries. World economic problems cannot be solved without the co-operation of all countries, both the industrially developed and the economically less developed countries. An effective step in this direction would undoubtedly be the convening of an international economic conference with the widest possible participation of all the interested countries. The task of such a conference would be to prepare concrete measures to restore international economic relations to normal and expanding foreign trade and economic co-operation. With regard to the economic development of under-developed countries, Czechoslovakia continues to support actively the idea of establishing a special United Nations fund for this purpose.
61.	With a view to achieving successful results at this session and in the general interests of future United Nations work, the Czechoslovak delegation feels obliged to refer to a number of important problems which concern the actual work of the Organization and its organs. In the first place, there is the question of equitable geographical representation in the organs of the United Nations, as referred to in the Charter. The violation of this principle is dealing a serious blow to international co-operation. It is impairing the representative nature of the United Nations and undermining the work of its organs, and is having the effect of denying whole geographical areas the opportunity to participate actively in solving the important problems discussed in the United Nations. Last year, for example, the seat of a non-permanent member of the Security Council, which under the gentleman’s agreement of 1946 belongs to an eastern European country, was assigned to a State from another geographical area.
62.	The Czechoslovak delegation also considers it wholly inadmissible that one of the permanent members of the Security Council, the People’s Republic of China, should still be denied its lawful place in the United Nations. The course of international events has long since shown that no international political problems can seriously be solved without the participation of representatives of the People's Republic of China. The work and prestige of our Organization are the first to suffer from the fact that lawful representatives of the People’s Republic of China are deprived of an opportunity to take part in United Nations work. Also contrary to the principles of the United Nations Charter and to the interests of peaceful international co-operation is the fact that a certain group of countries is preventing such a democratic and peace-loving country as the Mongolian People's Republic from becoming a Member of our Organization.
63.	Discrimination against the socialist countries with regard to equitable geographical representation in United Nations organs, the flouting of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations, the refusal to admit the Mongolian People's Republic to the United Nations, although it meets all the requirements of such admission, and attempts to intervene in the domestic affairs of the Hungarian People’s Republic - all this shows that attempts are still being made to direct the United Nations along a course which does not correspond to its purposes and to turn it into the instrument of one Power's policy. Such ambitions are contrary to the United Nations Charter, undermine the very foundations of our Organization and are incompatible with the interests of peace.
64.	Important international political problems might be solved much more easily if all States adhered in their mutual relations to the principles of peaceful coexistence. The implementation of these principles calls for observance of the sovereignty and full equality of rights of States, mutual respect for territorial integrity, non-aggression and non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other States. Despite the opposition of partisans of the negotiation from a "position of strength" policy, the principles of peaceful coexistence are being implemented and acknowledged by an ever-increasing number of States, through the active efforts of the masses of the people to preserve peace. Clear evidence of this was the Bandung Conference of Asian and African countries.
65.	If the General Assembly is resolved to fulfil its task of ensuring peace and peaceful co-operation among nations, it is essential that it should support this desire to apply the principles of peaceful coexistence in relations among all States. Accordingly, the Czechoslovak delegation fully supports the draft declaration concerning the peaceful coexistence of States submitted to the General Assembly by the Soviet Union delegation [A/3673] as a separate item.
66.	The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic is consistently guided by the principles of peaceful coexistence. Its relations with other countries have always been and continue to be based on the principle that all problems between States must be settled by peaceful means, with due respect for the rights and vital interests of peoples. The Czechoslovak people, in firm unity and brotherly co-operation with their liberator, the Soviet Union, and with other socialist countries, are successfully building communism fen their country and are developing friendly relations with all countries, thus contributing to the cause of peace and friendship among the peoples. The policy of peace and friendly coexistence among peoples derives from the very nature of our social system. We want peace and we need it to carry out the great tasks of socialist construction aimed at constantly raising the material and cultural standard of living of our people. Czechoslovakia adheres to the principles of peaceful coexistence in its everyday policies. We maintain good and mutually advantageous economic relations with States which have different social and economic systems, but which observe the principles of peaceful coexistence and pursue a peace-loving policy, and these relations are constantly expanding.
67.	We are connected with many countries by long traditions of cultural ties, which we are constantly strengthening. In accordance with the principles of peaceful coexistence, we proposed at the last session of the General Assembly a draft re solution concerning the development of cultural relations which was unanimously adopted by the General Assembly [resolution 1043 (XI)]. The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic attaches great importance to the improvement of mutual relations and the establishment of personal contacts between representatives of Governments and parliaments and other outstanding leaders, and will maintain such contacts in the future. We are in favour of peaceful competition between States, which would be of benefit to the peoples and advance the cause of progress throughout the world.
68.	The Czechoslovak delegation considers that the widespread application of the principles of peaceful coexistence should have the full support of the United Nations and hopes that the results of the work of the twelfth session of the General Assembly will promote the achievement of this aim. On behalf of the Czechoslovak Government, I wish this session great success in its work, in which the Czechoslovak delegation intends to take an active part, with a view to strengthening universal peace and security.


I wish first of all to thank the President for the opportunity to make this brief statement in connexion with the speech made by Mr. Rapacki, Chairman of the delegation of the Polish People's Republic and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland, [697th meeting], concerning problems of disarmament and the manufacture and stock piling of atomic weapons in Europe.
101.	The Government of the Polish People's Republic has proposed to abstain from manufacturing and stockpiling atomic weapons in the territory of the Polish People's Republic, if agreement is reached between the two German States — the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany — to assume a similar obligation in accordance with the previous proposals of the German Democratic Republic.
102.	The Czechoslovak Government has repeatedly considered possible specific steps towards a solution of the disarmament problem and has often expressed Its readiness to give every assistance in the execution of individual partial measures which would hasten and facilitate a solution of the disarmament problem as a whole.
103.	With respect to partial measures in Europe, the Czechoslovak Government's efforts hinge on the fact that foreign Powers have atomic bases in one part of Germany and that one hears open talk there of plans to equip the West Germany army with atomic weapons and even statements that, despite all existing undertakings, the Federal Republic of Germany should be given an opportunity to manufacture these weapons itself.
104.	Since we are immediate neighbours of both German States and were one of the first victims of German imperialist expansion, we are fully aware of the danger to Czechoslovakia and to the peace of Europe which this policy of equipping West Germany with atomic weapons entails.
105.	In its statement of 24September [680th meeting]. the Government of the Czechoslovak Republic called attention to the fact that the establishment of atomic bases in the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany and the arming of the West German army with thermonuclear weapons seriously jeopardized the interests of universal peace and represented a direct threat to all the European peoples, none of whom could escape the consequences of a military gamble launched with the use of the most powerful means of destruction yet known.
106.	Czechoslovakia of course has sufficient means and facilities to counter such a threat, and there is no need to emphasize that, in company with the other parties to the Warsaw Treaty, it could not stand idly by observing the continued establishment of atomic bases near its western frontiers, the equipping of the West Germany army with atomic weapons and the manufacture of such weapons by the German Federal Republic itself. We believe, however, that it is in the interest of all European peoples to explore every possibility of contributing to a reduction of international tension in Europe and the rest of the world as well as to the achievement of progress in the disarmament question.
107.	For this reason, the Czechoslovak delegation, in keeping with the stand which Czechoslovakia has always taken on disarmament and in conformity with the complete support which we have given to the Soviet Union proposals for solving the disarmament question and to the German Democratic Republic's proposals for concluding an agreement by which atomic weapons would not be manufactured or stockpiled in the territories of either of the German States, welcomes the initiative of the Polish People's Republic and regards it as an important and constructive step towards the solution of a problem which is giving rise to concern in all parts of the world.
108.	I am authorized by the Government of the Czechoslovak Republic to inform the representatives of all States Members of the United Nations that Czechoslovakia is prepared, in the interest of reducing international tension, to subscribe to the proposal of the Polish People's Republic and to assume an obligation to refrain from manufacturing or stockpiling atomic weapons in any part of its territory, provided that both German States reach an agreement to prohibit the manufacture and stockpiling of such weapons in the territory of Germany, as the German Democratic Republic has proposed.
109.	We are convinced that the willingness of Poland and Czechoslovakia to assume an obligation to that effect can facilitate the conclusion of such an agreement, which would unquestionably be a step towards solving the problem of guaranteeing European security. It would be a major contribution to the improvement of the international atmosphere and the attainment of agreement on further measures of disarmament.
