It is a great honour for me to come to this rostrum for the sixth time as the representative of my Government and to state its views on some of the major problems now under discussion, problems which must be solved before we can give the peoples of the world stable peace and enable them to enjoy the benefits of man's increasing knowledge.
76.	First I must extend on behalf of the Government and people of Ecuador a warm welcome to the two new nations which have been admitted to membership this year: the Republic of Ghana and the Federation of Malaya. Their presence here will enable us to ascertain their views on the best way to promote coexistence between States with different political and economic systems or at different stages of development.
77.	It will be Instructive to hear the views of statesmen who have fought for their country’s independence and to secure respect for the individual and observance of the law. The Government of Ecuador will be happy to establish and maintain diplomatic relations with these States and to develop close cultural ties and mutually beneficial economic relations with them.
78.	The year 1956 brought us a number of problems which threatened world peace. The United Nations had to exert the most strenuous efforts to avert a catastrophe even more devastating in its consequences than the Second World War. The present year opened in an atmosphere of profound and widespread apprehension. The Organization's authority was severely tried by the vehement and implacable refusal of one of the great Powers to comply with General Assembly resolutions calling for the restoration of Hungary's right to its own government, and of its people's right to complete freedom.
79.	There has in the meantime been some relaxation of world tension. Nevertheless nothing positive has been achieved in the Hungarian question, and the independence of this people, that made such heroic sacrifices in October and November last year and was so pitilessly subjugated by Soviet armed might, is still being trampled underfoot. Order is being restored and the economy rebuilt, but only through the triumph of naked force over a conquered people, a people in hunger and want, dominated solely because its territory is occupied by a foreign army that guards, enslaves and intimidates it.
80.	The statements made here by the representatives of the Soviet Union and the present Hungarian Government banish all hope that the rulers of the Hungarian people will agree to comply with the dictates of the world's conscience, which were faithfully reflected in the General Assembly resolutions.
81.	But an end will come to the sufferings of the Hungarian people. There are clear signs that far-reaching changes are in progress in all the communist regimes, and that a modification of the political structure of the so-called peoples' democracies is at hand. Spiritual forces must prevail, and no barrier can withstand the mysterious power that drives men to strive for freedom and to overcome all the obstacles to the exercise of this fundamental right. This process of liberation is brought about not, as some think, through the influence of foreign powers, but through the dissemination of ideas in universities, technical institutes and laboratories.
82.	The young people of the Soviet Union and the satellite countries cannot be treated in the same way as their unschooled and fanatic predecessors, for they have become familiar with new ideas and are in a position to demand a higher standard of life and the fulfilment of material and spiritual needs hitherto unmet. The contact of the young people of the Soviet Union and of its artists, scientists and journalists with Western culture has not been without effect; the same applies to the opening of the previously closed frontiers of the Soviet countries, despite the fact that travel within these countries is closely supervised and severely restricted.
83.	The radio has led to an interchange of ideas between East and West. Its voice has penetrated to every home and awakened millions of sleeping consciences. Books, newspapers and magazines - published in freedom or in defiance of the censorship-provide inspiration and are bringing about a radical change in the outlook of men and women who formerly had access only to official statements put out by the authorities. But even without radios, books, newspapers and magazines, the human mind continues to function, oppression notwithstanding; history has shown that even in concentration camps, in prison cells and dungeons, prisoners in solitary confinement are buoyed up by this power of thought until such time as their chains are broken, concentration camps vanish and prisons are thrown open, with the triumph of liberty over might.
84.	Once this movement has begun, no one can halt its slow but certain advance. The clock cannot be put back, and the movement will follow its imperturbable course until all the peoples of the earth enjoy their human rights.
85.	A similar historical process culminated in the founding of the United Nations. This development reflected the need to set legal standards for relations between States and to limit the indiscriminate and arbitrary use of force. The United Nations provided States with an instrument for the settlement of their disputes by peaceful means in order to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, as the Charter so truly puts it, and establish the reign of justice and law in international relations.
86.	In setting up the United Nations, States had to accept certain rules of law and although these involved some limitation of their sovereignty, any loss of power was offset by increased security and stability. The United Nations is not an international device conceived by ingenious statesmen as a means of combating isolationism and providing a breathing space to prepare for another world war. The United Nations fulfils certain fundamental needs in contemporary international law.
87.	But the Organization has not yet reached maturity and at this early stage of its development it is still marred by hesitation and insecurity. It must gain new supporters, convince the doubtful, overcome resistance, vanquish obstacles and win the enthusiastic and wholehearted co-operation of all the peoples of the world. The world Organization that came into being at San Francisco still lacks the necessary experience successfully to overcome the prejudices and vested interests that hamper the complete fulfilment of its mission. A few months ago the United Nations was sorely tried by the rash action of great Powers which momentarily forgot their noble mission as standard bearers of Western civilization and violated the law they themselves had helped to establish. Happily, this severe test was passed with flying colours and equilibrium was promptly restored, an equilibrium that might, if disrupted, have threatened the very existence of the United Nations.
88.	If the Organization continues to develop normally, we may confidently affirm that in ten years’ time no one will question the need for its existence or its importance as an international catalyst and as a meeting-ground for all political creeds, economic systems and philosophies of life.
89.	But the body of law governing the United Nations has many deficiencies and some flaws. It was a work of experimentation, compromise and balance, the greatest care being taken to obtain the agreement not only of the great Powers, but also of other States, less powerful militarily and economically, whose intellectual and moral authority entitled them to a voice in the drafting of this document. Although the Charter is an admirable document so far as the reconciliation of interests is concerned, it was inevitably influenced by the war atmosphere, since at the time of its signing the thunder of guns was still to be heard, and millions were still in such a state of misery and distress that they clamoured for vengeance rather than justice. The same statesmen who directed the war effort also led the diplomatic negotiations that culminated in the text of the Charter submitted to other States for study and comment. The San Francisco Conference led to considerable changes in this original text, but certain provisions and institutions had to be retained in order to secure acceptance of the proposal as a whole.
90.	The authors of the Charter could not have foreseen the remarkable and rapid progress the United Nations has made in the short period that has since elapsed. The number of Member States has almost doubled, and all the factors which were taken into account in determining the Organization’s structure are now out of date. There is a growing demand for an extension of the sphere of activity of officials and representatives, since the legal provisions within which the Organization operates have become too narrow and restrictive. The proposal to revise the Charter is not, as some have maintained, merely an attempt to change something that is functioning satisfactorily. On the contrary, it is designed to meet a want, to extend spheres of activity, and to take account of entirely new facts and circumstances which must be reflected in our statute if the United Nations is to fulfil its purpose and meet a vital need.
91.	The Soviet Union, which is opposed to a revision of the Charter, will have to modify its position and recognize the facts that necessitate changes in the structure of the United Nations. If the proposal for revision is to be successful, it must take a form which is acceptable both to the Soviet Government and to the other four Powers that assume the undemocratic right of using their vote to secure the rejection of any measure that is not to their liking. Until this revision is feasible, we must concentrate on piecemeal and urgent improvements which are acceptable to the majority of Member States.
92.	In view of the pressing demand from new Members for seats in the major United Nations bodies, the Latin-American republics and Spain have proposed enlarging the membership of the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the International Court of Justice. This joint proposal was included in last year's agenda, but was deferred to the present session because, in view of events in Hungary and in the Middle East, the atmosphere was hardly propitious to its discussion, and it was felt that to take the proposal any further would be to doom it to failure. Circumstances now seem more favourable. The basic problem is to find some way of ensuring the equitable geographic distribution of new posts among the various groups that have grown up within the United Nations, so that none of them feels that it has been overlooked, and each has an opportunity to contribute its share.
93.	The Ecuadorian delegation would urge the Assembly to give serious consideration to the three items I have mentioned, so that our Organization may be truly universal, not only because all its Members are represented in the General Assembly, but also because all regional groups and cultures will be represented in the Councils and in the International Court of Justice.
94.	A delicate and complex problem that has faced the United Nations since its inception is that of securing an administrative staff that not only meets high professional and moral standards, but also functions efficiently and keeps operating costs low. Since Mr. Hammarskjold took up office as Secretary-General, he has distinguished himself by his energetic and dynamic approach to the problem, and by his policy of developing modern, speedy, straightforward and economical administrative procedures. The internal administration of the Secretariat, and its co-ordination with the specialized agencies, deserve the highest praise. The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, so ably presided over by the Secretary-General, has obtained substantial savings in money and effort by avoiding duplication of staff and of budgetary appropriations. Although much progress has been made in this difficult matter of co-ordination and economy, much remains to be done, but we hope that the Secretary-General will eventually be able to point to the United Nations and its specialized agencies, including the newly-founded International Atomic Energy Agency, as models of administrative co-ordination. The Economic and Social Council has made a valuable contribution to this effort, and we hope that it will continue to offer all possible assistance to Mr. Hammarskjold. It is only by such methods that concerted and effective action can be taken in respect of large-scale programmes, particularly those which are of interest to the under-developed countries.
95.	One of the Secretary-General's suggestions which I believe, may be of great value to many States, particularly to those which have just come into being, is the establishment of an international administrative service. The members of that service would be employed in the administration of the country requiring their services. Some delegations have raised objections to this suggestion by the Secretary-General. The presence of foreign officials, it has been argued, might be repugnant to a sovereign State, because they would participate with certain powers and authority in the management of the public affairs of a country not their own. I do not think there is sufficient ground for this objection. I can see no reason why it should be repugnant to a country to accept technical experts of other nationalities to discharge, in its administration, functions for which there are no trained national experts available. In that event, the whole programme of technical assistance, which has so often rendered such signal service in many countries, would collapse.
96.	Chapters XI and XII of the Charter contain rules for the administration of territories whose peoples have not yet attained a full measure of self-government or have been placed under the International Trusteeship System. These rules constitute a far-reaching innovation in modern international law. They have dealt a death blow to the old and outworn colonial system, making it possible to mitigate its harmful effects and to pave the way for its disappearance by a less disastrous process than the use of force by those subjected to its yoke. But it would be unfair to blame this system alone for all the ills and the backwardness afflicting the countries on which it has been imposed, because it must be recognized that at a certain stage in history and in certain geographical regions the colonizing nations discharged a noble, civilizing mission: by transmitting to these territories their linguistic, religious, cultural and scientific heritage they enabled them to advance to join the main stream of Western civilization, a process which was to their advantage.
97.	Colonizers have not always been merciless exploiters, as the opponents of the system allege. Sometimes they were the bearers of civilization; they made the soil bear fruit; they were the dynamic human force that lifted many peoples out of their primitive state into one in which they could develop a personality of their own. The colonial system was in the past a means of bringing the benefits of technology and scientific and industrial advances to the four corners of the globe. This system has now served its purpose, and those who seek to prolong its existence today are creating a problem to which it will, be very hard to find a just and peaceful solution. Chapter XII of the United Nations Charter provides for a system effectively guaranteeing to certain peoples the attainment of self-government, a process which will necessarily lead to independence. To oppose this natural trend of development is to deny the spirit underlying the five provisions of this Chapter.
98.	The Administering Authorities have accepted a sacred trust, which clearly implies that the territories they administer and their peoples will one day acquire a different status, and they must therefore endeavour to hasten the time when free political institutions enable those countries to become independent. The International Trusteeship System is unquestionably intended to culminate in self-government or complete independence. In both cases the Charter regards as temporary the system under which one country guides the destinies of another and does not countenance the perpetuation of a system subjecting to an alien, will peoples who, owing to special circumstances, are for the time being unable to assume responsibility for their own affairs. Unfortunately, political and economic considerations are impeding the normal and proper development of the Trusteeship System and of the system for Non-Self-Governing Territories. Countries with a long and illustrious tradition, such as Cyprus, are being denied their right to self-determination, the right to take whatever road they choose to map out for themselves. The perpetration of alien authority over territories whose peoples are fully capable of self-government contributes to international tension and facilitates propaganda against the Western democracies. The bitter and costly experience of the past few years will lead to a better understanding of both the letter and the spirit of Chapters XI and XII of the Charter, which have already borne magnificent fruit. Much tact and moderation will be needed for the solution of other issues which have recently arisen among peoples intimately linked, until yesterday, by legal and historical ties, for, on the pretext of aiding a noble movement for independence, encouragement is being given to a destructive nationalism which will lead to new forms not only of colonialism but of slavery infinitely worse than those from which emancipation is sought.
99.	The Government of Ecuador, true to the tradition of law to which it owes its independence, will always be ready to lend its resolute support to peoples which have achieved political maturity and claim the exercise of their right to self-determination. It is also convinced that all problems can be solved by negotiation and believes that the time has come to use the influence of the world Organization to bring about a peaceful settlement of disputes and controversies hampering full understanding among peoples and their normal economic development. Negotiations conducted with intelligence, humanity, understanding and justice will save precious lives which would otherwise be lost in futile conflict.
100.	My Government is deeply anxious to stimulate our country’s economic development. It has devoted substantial resources and efforts to that purpose under a well considered plan, based on an objective study of Ecuadorian conditions. By means of public health programmes, it is attempting to eradicate diseases, which previously decimated the population, particularly in the tropical coastal areas. We are grateful to the United Nations Children's Emergency Fund and to the World Health Organization for their effective help in conducting the malaria eradication campaign, in promoting maternal welfare and in improving child nutrition. A few days ago, a substantial extension of our main railway line was opened, making a very rich area available for cultivation which will greatly increase the volume of produce available for export. Ecuador also attaches vital importance to school building, the campaign against illiteracy, the development of basic education, free education from school to university, the training of teachers, the provision of funds for housing and plans for electrification and settlement. Signal progress has been achieved in all spheres of national life, and the country fortunately enjoys a degree of political stability providing security for private enterprise and large-scale capital investment.
101.	My country is at present recognized as one of the most scrupulous in the fulfilment of its international economic obligations and each day sees an expansion of its trade with both other American and non-American countries. We are engaged in an effort which exceeds the country's resources and for which we need international co-operation given on conditions compatible with our capacity to pay. Our political system is functioning normally, and we can vouch for the fact that the climate of life in Ecuador is one of peace, democracy and freedom, in which human rights are enjoyed to the full. As a member of the Organization of American States, Ecuador considers it impossible to settle any economic or financial problem satisfactorily without reference to the other members of this family of States, since they are intimately linked not only by geography but by a long-standing tradition of solidarity in matters of labour production, the mobilization of resources, the fixing of prices for products, the regulation of markets and lastly, the co-ordination of the many and varied factors in their economies. Nor can world problems be solved without regard for the interests of this important group of American States, with their steadily expanding populations and their increasing importance in international trade. America has not united to fight any State or group of States, but to obtain the benefit both of inter-American co-operation and of co-operation with groups outside the continent. In accordance with its Charter, our American organization discharges a function of world importance which is in complete accord with the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations. Like all American States, Ecuador has derived great benefit from its ties both with the regional and the world Organization and has always striven for the greatest possible harmony between the work of these two institutions.
102.	The Organization of American States has developed in three stages: the first, which was a spontaneous outcome of nineteenth century principles runs from the attainment of independence by most of the member States until 1889; the second dates from that year, which saw the beginning of the conferences to draft what is called American international law, and the third from the establishment of the organization which obtained its statute with the adoption of the Charter of the Organization at the Ninth International Conference of American States at Bogota in 1948. Despite the great economic and commercial interest aroused by the Washington Conference of 1889, the Organization has achieved more in the political and cultural spheres. The Inter-American Economic and Social Council and the various financial, economic and commercial conferences of past years have not yielded the results that had been hoped for. In line with the growing trend towards economic co-operation, a regional conference met this year at Buenos Aires, at which representatives of the various countries outlined their Government's views, gave an objective analysis of economic conditions in the continent and of social conditions in each country, and discussed the problem of co-ordinating their economies, because such co-ordination has so far been sporadic and frequently unsatisfactory. The need for a continental market was studied, and although the proposal’s reception was disappointing to its sponsors, it may be said that at Buenos Aires the foundations were laid for future development. Technical studies are required for that purpose and, without them, any agreement would be premature and of doubtful success. A beginning has been made with the economic co-ordination which is our aim. Its full achievement will depend on the efforts of those responsible for directing production in our countries. It will be a large-scale undertaking, in which both Governments and private enterprise will take part. The example of Europe, with its Treaty of Rome, compels us to follow the same road if we are not to be defeated by others more intelligent and stronger than ourselves, despite the optimism voiced here by the distinguished representative of Italy in his able defence of the European common market, which he said would be beneficial not only to that continent but also to other geographic areas. The future will show whether we have been too sanguine in affirming that America will regulate and co-ordinate its economic and financial life to defend itself and to prosper.
103.	The disarmament problem was discussed for five months in London in the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission, but no agreement was reached. Yet Mr. Stassen, the United States representative, assures us that East and West have succeeded in drawing closer together than ever before and expresses great optimism regarding future prospects for disarmament. What we have heard here in the general debate does not justify the United States representative's optimism. For some time to come, it appears, mankind will still have to endure not only the fear of war, the fear of the use of weapons of mass destruction, but what is even more serious, the constant and extensive contamination of the atmosphere, the land and the waters as a result of nuclear weapons tests, which none of the producing countries is willing to suspend, except on conditions which are not acceptable to all parties. In addition, the armaments race is seriously disrupting the world economy and must be regarded as chiefly responsible for the inflation which is assuming Increasingly alarming proportions and is disturbing the economies of all countries, since none can avoid this evil. My Government endorses the plea of all peace-loving peoples that efforts should be made to conclude at least a provisional agreement, which would end the growing threat to the health and life of present and future generations.
104.	My delegation is confident that under the President's skilful guidance all the items we have decided to include in the agenda of this session will be discussed and settled in an atmosphere of calm. We are confident of this, because we witnessed his work in the First Committee where we applauded the able manner in which he discharged his important and delicate duties. His great experience is a guarantee that the twelfth session of the General Assembly will reaffirm the promise which the future holds for the United Nations.
105.	Although the chairman of the American regional group has already congratulated Mr. Hammarskjold on his re-election as Secretary-General of the United Nations, I should like, before concluding, to express my Government's and my own satisfaction at the recognition given to one of the younger statesmen of the modern work, whose ability, sincerity, moderation and energy have won respect for our Organization, not only on the administrative plane but also in the sphere of international politics, economics and diplomacy. His re-election is a just recognition of his merits. We foresee that his new five-year term of office will be a period of growth in the world importance and influence of the United Nations.
