This is the first time that I have spoken since the beginning of the twelfth session. I should therefore like at the outset to extend to Sir Leslie Munro, on behalf of my Government, our heartfelt congratulations on his election to the presidency of the present session. His well-known qualities and long experience will, I am sure, yield the best results in the conduct of the proceedings of this Assembly. I should also like to express my Government's appreciation to Mr. Charles Malik, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, whose statesmanlike gesture made it possible for the Assembly to elect its President unanimously.
2.	The unanimous appointment of the Secretary-General to a second term of office has been a cause of gratification and rejoicing for all of us, it is my honour and privilege to offer him the sincerest congratulations of the Libyan people and Government. His dedication to the cause of the United Nations and his devotion to the principles of its Charter, as well as his integrity and outstanding ability as an impartial negotiator, have won the admiration of the world. May his success continue in his second term of office and may that constitute a good omen for the assertion of the lofty principles for which he stands.
3.	It has become almost the custom during the last few sessions of the Assembly to witness new delegations, representing newly-born nations, taking their seats in this Organization. This is indeed a feature which leads to optimism. It indicates that the spirit of our epoch — the spirit of the Charter and, more particularly, the spirit of the right of peoples to self-determination— is being felt. We welcome this trend and express the hope that the process of the development of new nations towards assuming the responsibility of independence will continue steadfastly the years to come.
4.	On behalf of the United Kingdom of Libya, I now offer the Federation of Malaya our sincere congratulations both on its orderly and peaceful achievement of independence and on its admission to the United Nations. We wish it prosperity and steady progress in its newly acquired status.
5.	At its eleventh session, this Assembly devoted much time and effort to explosive aspects of the world crisis; it succeeded in solving some problems and in easing others. It is gratifying indeed to realize that the atmosphere of the present session is clearer and quieter. But there still remains what I would call the chronic aspect of the world crises. In fact, a general tension, a feeling of fear and suspicion, still prevails in the world.
6.	Fear, suspicion and tension are the effects of the armaments race. The Romans of old used to say, "If you want peace, prepare for war". Today, twenty-five centuries later, the situation remains basically the same. Technically speaking, we live in peace, but in an armed peace where thunderous explosions very often disturb the atmosphere in different parts of the globe. Never in the history of mankind has peace been so heavily burdened with deadly weapons capable of killing hundreds of thousands of people and affecting further hundreds of thousands in body and spirit. Never in the history of mankind has peace been so fraught with danger and so full of unknowns.
7.	We in Libya feel the adverse effects of this most unhappy situation and are, understandably, as concerned as any other nation. Libya has no arsenals, no arms except for keeping internal order. Having emerged into statehood only six years ago, Libya has no other ambitions than those of building for itself a viable economy; of developing with its sister Arab countries the fraternal ties which stem from their common origin, culture, language and religion; and of collaborating with all other peace-loving nations for the maintenance of peace and security in the world. What Libya wants is peace —real peace.
8.	It is our hope that the present session of the Assembly will be successful in securing an agreement on the question of disarmament which would free mankind from the nightmare of total destruction.
9.	I need hardly say that Libya, by virtue of its birth and its growth in the community of nations, entertains the strongest belief in the principles of the Charter and an unshakable confidence that this Organization will be able ultimately to achieve world-wide well-being and understanding. Circumstance have proved in the recent past that the confidence placed in the United Nations is not baseless. The Organization has stood firm in the face of difficult situations which threatened world peace. We in Libya believe that, through the framework of the United Nations, any problem of an international character — however intricate it may be — can be solved by peaceful efforts.
10.	We believe also that the consolidation of peace depends to a large extent on the degree of respect entertained by the strongest nations for the rights of the weaker nations to enjoy freedom and independence. Unhappily, it cannot be said that this has always been the case. In North Africa a fierce struggle is going on; it is a three-years-old shooting war. There, a valiant people, a section of the greater Arab nation, is daily sacrificing scores of its youth to assert its right to a decent life. I refer to the Algerian people.
11.	This war continues to cause widespread human suffering and to disturb the peace and stability of the whole area. It is a matter for regret, indeed, that the General Assembly's resolution [1012 (XI)] adopted at the last session should remain unheeded. France has not attempted to seek a peaceful settlement of the conflict. France continues to adhere to the theory that Algeria is a part of the metropolitan territory. This contention, needless to say, is baseless. Algeria, by virtue of its geographical position, its history, race, religion and language, is a separate entity from France and has its own character. The situation in Algeria has deteriorated considerably in the last few months. Atrocities, torture, mass extermination and destruction are now the main features of the deplorable state of affairs which exists. Innocent Algerian men, women and children are daily victims of the French armed forces.
12.	My Government, therefore, joined other Member States in asking that the question of Algeria be placed again on the agenda of this body for discussion. It is our sincere hope that debate on this question at the present session will lead to ways and means conducive to an equitable solution, thus putting an end to bloodshed and desolation. One may ask: what is the equitable solution? The answer is clear: recognition of the right of the Algerian people to self-determination and independence in conformity with the principles of the Charter.
13.	There is another question of great importance which continues to be of concern in my country. It is the question of the Palestinian refugees. These unhappy people continue to lead miserable lives in the most appalling squalor. The Zionist terrorism uprooted them from their homes and from the land on which their forbears had lived for centuries. As they watch from across the Israel frontiers, they can see their fields being tilled by aggressors, while they themselves are compelled to stretch forth their hands for charity. The funds allotted to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for caring for these people are falling further and further below the amount necessary to guarantee the minimum number of calories required to keep them alive.
14.	What is the solution, then? The solution was indicated by the General Assembly in numerous resolutions adopted years ago: the Palestinian refugees must return to their homes; those who prefer to settle somewhere else are entitled to compensation. But Israel ref used, and continues to refuse, to accept this solution. There is no room for the Palestinian refugees in Israel — but there is plenty of room for more and more Jewish immigrants, who will constitute in due course the instrument for attempted expansion at the expense of the neighbouring countries. It is clear that there will be no stability in the Middle East as long as the problem of the Arab refugees remains unsolved. This has been said again and again from this rostrum in past years and has brought bitterness into the debates. But surely it is to be repeated year after year until justice and fairness have triumphed.
15.	My delegation, along with a number of other Member States, has requested the inclusion of the question of West Irian in the agenda again this year. We feel that this long-standing question continues to disturb the friendly relations existing between Indonesia and the Netherlands. My country, which is friendly with both of these countries, believes that there is an issue involved here and that it is most desirable to discuss it in the hope of reaching an amicable solution.
16.	I conclude by begging the Almighty to inspire the proceedings of this session in its endeavour to meet the great expectation of the world for a lasting peace and universal happiness and harmony.
