I should like first to congratulate most sincerely Sir Leslie Munro on the confidence placed in him by the General Assembly and the deserved tribute it has paid him in electing him to the high office of President.
23.	I am also pleased to congratulate Mr. Hammarskjold most warmly on his re-election as Secretary-General of the United Nations. His clear-sightedness, his devotion to the ideals of peace and justice and the fine qualities he has displayed carrying out the delicate missions entrusted to him justify the unanimous vote in his favour and the hopes which the peoples of the world have placed in him for the fulfilment of their aspirations.
24.	We are happy to see the family of free nations grow from year to year, thus continuously strengthening the universality of the United Nations. We should like to take this opportunity of extending a fraternal welcome to the Federation of Malaya which has just attained independence and is taking its place among us. We trust that other nations which are still struggling for freedom and sovereignty will soon be able to join our ranks.
25.	Since Morocco has become independent and has taken its place in the community of nations, it has devoted itself enthusiastically to the work of construction and peace. In line with its tradition, my country once more affirms its devotion to the fundamental principles of the Charter and its intention to make its modest contribution to co-operation between nations.
26.	His Majesty the King of Morocco, and the Moroccan Government and people are persevering in their efforts to ensure understanding and enforcement of these principles, and it is in this spirit that we have faced the difficult and complicated problems following the attainment of our independence. We have always chosen peaceful settlement and negotiations with other nations for the liquidation of the colonial regime. We shall always be prompted by this same spirit despite the yearning for colonial domination that is still deep-rooted in certain quarters which find it difficult to adapt themselves to the new situation.
27.	Even though colonial domination is not always crudely apparent in political matters, it seeks to disguise itself, especially in the economic field. One of our major difficulties is the development of our national resources to establish our independence on sound and lasting foundations and raise the standard of living of our population. This calls for capital and technicians. Attempts are made to take advantage of our needs and to subject us to a grave ordeal by tying all assistance to conditions which are frequently incompatible with respect for a free sovereign nation.
28.	Morocco has repeatedly proved its desire for co-operation and mutual understanding and certainly does not intend to allow any infringement on its independence. Help and assistance from the great Powers to under-developed countries is definitely one of the factors making for stability and peace in the world. However, help and assistance of this kind can be effective only if granted unreservedly and without the ulterior motive of establishing a new colonialism, whatever its form.
29.	To develop and exploit the economic resources of under-developed countries, attempts are being made to set up vast economic programmes; however, there can be no doubt that without the consent of these countries and their participation at the preparatory stage, plans which have recently been worked out would encounter serious obstacles.
30.	The great Powers will best fulfil their solemn responsibilities by abandoning once and for all the obsolete colonial system as prescribed by a proper understanding of the Charter and the development of international law, and by treating the smaller nations as equals, helping them to build up their economies and improve their standards of living.
31.	We place great hope in the work that the United Nations can do to support the under-developed countries and help them to cope with their difficulties and fight for a better life with every chance of success.
32.	Hence we enthusiastically support the idea of setting up a special fund for economic development. After hesitation and procrastination this idea is happily beginning to take shape. We fervently hope that the General Assembly at its current session will endorse the resolution on this subject recently adopted by the Economic and Social Council. Hunger and poverty are at the root of despair and disorders. It is the duty of the United Nations to combat them unremittingly and without delay; that is one of the vital functions of the United Nations, and it would be greatly facilitated if the great Powers were prepared to abandon the armaments race which they are so energetically pursuing.
33.	As a result of its geographic and strategic position, Morocco is particularly interested in the solution of the disarmament problem and hopes that this wild arms race will be checked. The energy expended for that purpose would be so much more usefully employed in working for peace and material improvement. A feeling of security vital to the stability of the world and harmony among nations would thus be built up. The help of all countries, great and small, is necessary and indeed, essential, for the attainment of this goal.
34.	Our love of peace and freedom compels us to bring up a problem which is all the more painful to us because we must condemn a war waged by a nation with which we have close ties and with which we should like to have a fruitful relationship based on mutual trust.
35.	A veritable war, with its attendant misery and suffering, is raging in Algeria. The Algerian people, with whom we have many ties, is going through the most tragic moments of its existence. His Majesty the King of Morocco, whose affection for that proud and gallant people is well known, is greatly distressed by Algeria’s terrible ordeal. In a recent statement at Tangiers, he appealed for an end to this tragic situation which is disturbing peace and security throughout North Africa. Stressing the right of peoples to self-determination, His Majesty the King of Morocco said: "Algeria is in the forefront of peoples clamouring for independence. We hold that the use of violence is a mistake; the problem between France and Algeria is political and hence calls for a basically political solution to be sought through negotiation. We do not believe that solutions worked out without the participation of subject peoples and applied without their consent can succeed."
36.	We believe that imposed solutions are valueless, and that the era of colonialism and domination by force of arms is gone forever. We note with some bitterness that the situation in Algeria, far from improving since the debates of the eleventh session, has continued to deteriorate and that the extremely moderate resolution adopted by the General Assembly [resolution 1012 (XI)] recommending conciliation has remained a dead letter. The direct and daily impact of this war on the internal situation in Morocco is becoming increasingly serious and might well poison our relations with France. The conflagration rages at our frontier and threatens to spread into our own territory. The number of refugees in our country is constantly increasing and this raises especially serious human problems.
37.	The United Nations is in duty bound to do everything in its power to put an end to this tragic situation. It must call upon the parties concerned to seek a peacefully negotiated solution consistent with the principles of the Charter and more especially with the right of peoples to self-determination. Negotiation is indeed the wisest course and should be used in seeking such a solution. There is no lack of people with whom France can negotiate. Among them are the very people whom France still holds in captivity and who enjoy the confidence and support of their compatriots. This we believe to be the path most likely to safeguard the best interests of both parties and the best way to restore peace and stability in North Africa. We are convinced that understanding and co-operation growing from the consent of the parties and based on liberty and equality are more fruitful and profitable than imposed solutions or domination by the force of arms.
38.	The right of peoples to freedom and independence is a natural and sacred right; it is also a fundamental principle of the Charter of the United Nations. The peoples of the world still nourish the hope that the Members of the United Nations will contribute of their own free will to the implementation of this principle. The United Nations must not disappoint these peoples; for in this way a peaceful and friendly world will be built, ensuring freedom, justice and a better life for all.
