I propose to take into account the fact that a great number of Members are taking part in this general debate and to limit myself, therefore, to a brief statement. It would be too brief, however, if I did not begin by giving expression to my Government's high appreciation of the great services rendered to our Organization by the President's predecessor, His Royal Highness, Prince Wan Waithayakon; and to its joy at his own election, which I had the privilege to hail on a previous occasion.
131.	Now that we are assembled for the twelfth time in the in the history of the United Nations, we may look with growing interest upon the expanding membership of this Organization. Today, our number is greater than ever before. So far, there has been no need to persuade nations to join us. Indeed, application for membership is invariably among the first acts of foreign policy of new countries, as soon as they have attained independence. The most recent instance is the Federation of Malaya, and my Government and delegation take this opportunity to extend to that nation a most cordial welcome to our community, I could think of no mere fitting place than the United Nations for my country to express its gratification at the rebirth of the Malayan State, with which the Netherlands has had so many happy contacts in the past.
132. For Members old and new, membership of the United Nations should be a matter of constant attention, both constructive and critical. No matter how numerous we are -- and we have not yet reached the limit of our membership capacity, although we are rapidly approaching the limit of our accommodation facilities in this hall -- we must never forget that each of us bears his share of responsibility for making the United Nations work. For the United Nations is not an institution isolated from our own policy and political life. It is not a business enterprise of which one becomes a shareholder because of its attractive dividend propositions, leaving it to the board of directors to conduct the business. Nor is it an insurance company that covers risks or damages against annual payment of a premium or contribution. No, it is rather a joint undertaking that places commensurate burdens on each participant and the success of which is dependent on the efforts and contributions of each Member for its effective and smooth operation.
133. Therefore, whenever we speak of the United Nations we speak of nations, joined under one Charter, which should -- although often divided in political purpose or ideological outlook — be united at least in the common pursuit of the ideals and aims of our Charter. As a community of independent States, we are an instrument of twentieth-century diplomacy, organized to deal with a wide range of matters and to set out a new pattern of international behaviour from which future generations may benefit. They may, or they may not; that indeed depends on our labours and achievements.
134.	Broadly speaking, I would say that there are two types of activity of the United Nations, each of them equally important, yet different in their impact on the future. The first type could be called the short-term activity, such as the search for equitable solutions to international conflicts or disputes. The second type is the long-term activity, in which this Organization is engaged in order to make this world a better and safer place to live in.
135.	I wish first to say a few words about the first type, which is the handling of conflicts or disputes. Some of those conflicts or disputes properly belong to the business of this Organization; others do not. In some cases, a solution may be found outside the framework of the United Nations. And, occasionally, more harm than good is done by the repeated discussion and adoption of resolutions. It would be wrong for this Organization to be over-ambitious or to pretend to be the sole instrument for settlement and adjustment. The Assembly, like the world itself, has its own inherent defects, and we should therefore exercise continuous criticism and restraint in respect of our work.
136.	We all know that, despite the alphabetical order in which we obediently sit, there is a certain division among the Members of the United Nations. Groupings have come into existence, mainly, but not solely, on a regional basis. I am not opposed to the emergence of such groups. Indeed, my country belongs to one of them, the European group — although it is worthwhile to note that this group was constituted later than other groups and was, to a certain extent, an unavoidable consequence of the existence of other groups.
137.	In many respects, such groups serve a useful purpose. By predigesting political issues and clearing and co-ordinating regional interests, the groups may help in speeding up the business of the Assembly. When these groups serve as a means of co-ordinating the views and policies of their members, their influence may be salutary. If, however, they are used to emphasize and intensify the differences and disputes between various parts of the world, the result may be an aggravation of antagonism. This is the case if a group places itself en bloc behind, let us say, the interest or claim of one member and supports his cause without going into the merits of the subject under discussion. That is the point where a group is transformed into a bloc. Such a development would be dangerous, and we should all try to avoid it.
138.	The second type of activity of the United Nations is, as I have just said, the long-range effort to make this world a better and safer place to live in. Here, all Members, large and small, have a similar task before them, to which they should devote their undivided and unbiased energy. I am thinking of the global problems that face humanity, such as the security of the world we live in -- both the political and the economic security. The Charter spells out as one of the main purposes of the United Nations: "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" to create "conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations".
139.	One matter of extreme importance now before us is that of disarmament. Despite years of painstaking negotiations, we have not yet arrived at practical results. Yet in the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission the West has been able to produce a specific and comprehensive proposal for a first-stage disarmament plan. The Netherlands supports this proposal.
140.	Let me point out to those who may be tempted by Soviet counter-proposals that any disarmament plan should be so designed as to increase, not decrease, the security of the world, or vital parts of it. If we should single out for acceptance only one particular detail of such a plan, however spectacular or attractive it might seem, without proper guarantee for continued security, we would do harm to the cause of disarmament.
141.	My country, for one, is only too well aware of the absolute need for collective security and protection against aggression or threats to the peace. Our geographical position and our political outlook carry the implication that we must be careful lest we give up vital protection without adequate safeguard. Let us not forget the lessons of recent history. The Baltic States were among the first victims of Soviet imperialism; other peripheral States followed, in Europe as well as in Asia. The tragic fate that befell the Hungarian nation has rightly caused the Assembly to give vent to its indignation and horror. All these dark deeds should teach us caution and suspicion with regard to any proposal on disarmament that might upset the present balance of armaments and collective defence organizations to the disadvantage of the free world.
142.	There is a second, long-term exercise that demands attention and, indeed, action. To eliminate one of the deep-seated causes of strife and instability, we should once more, and with special vigour, tackle the problem posed by the increasing divergence between economic and social progress in the developed countries, on the one hand, and in the under-developed countries, on the other. Here again we have a field in which many nations should play a constructive and stimulating role.
143.	My country, though not one of the big nations, considers it a duty to assist in bringing this problem nearer to a solution. We regard this matter as of equal importance with those of war and peace. We put it in these terms, not for selfish reasons of political or economic gain; on the contrary, we are fully aware that the developed countries eventually will have to make sacrifices. We maintain that this problem should have top priority because we sincerely feel that the United Nations would be shirking its responsibilities in respect of security, freedom and social justice if it failed to act and to act now.
144.	During this session, there is a unique opportunity for action. By a great majority, the Economic and Social Council has recommended to the General Assembly the establishment of a fund for economic development. I realize that such a basic decision needs further elaboration -- the Second Committee will see to that. I urgently appeal to all Members to honour the Council’s resolution. In particular, I appeal to those nations that have so far not been in a position to support the establishment of a fund. I well realize the difficulties which they have in this respect, and I do not think that any of the advocates of the fund would wish to ignore or neglect them. But I feel that, after the recommendation of the Council, a decision should be postponed no longer. I am convinced that, if the Assembly takes a positive decision this year, this twelfth session may be recorded in the history of the United Nations as one of significant achievement in the cause of peace and security.
145.	Speaking of the Economic and Social Council, I wish to reaffirm my country's intention to devote a growing volume of energy and attention to the economic and social work of the United Nations. In the same spirit, my country plans to intensify its co-operation with other nations within the three regional commissions, of each of which we have the honour to be a member. In the Economic and Social Council and in the Economic Commission for Latin America, as in so many other economic or political bodies of the United Nations, we derive great satisfaction and benefit from co-operation with the countries of Latin America. Through its autonomous parts, situated in the Latin American region, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is a neighbour of the Latin American countries; and Surinam and the Netherlands Antilles, as well as the Netherlands in Europe, are proud to have the most cordial historical, cultural and economic relations with that important part of the world.
146.	Many other problems face the Assembly, but I shall do no more than mention a few of them. My Government continues to be disturbed by the absence of settlement and peace in the Middle East. Since the intensive interventions of the United Nations on the Middle East scene during the last session of the General Assembly, relative quiet and order have returned to the area around Israel. This in itself is a healthy development which should not be disturbed by renewed debates in the United Nations or renewed accusations. However, the political instability that still persists keeps the area open for political incitement or even penetration, from which in the end no one will profit. It is the earnest hope and desire of my Government that, step by step, the sources of unrest and agitation will be removed.
147.	We are deeply concerned with the plight of the Palestine refugees, and we appeal to all concerned to renew and increase their efforts towards a fair and speedy solution. We must find ways and means of solving this problem which, for nearly ten years, has been one of the main obstacles on the road to progress and peace in the Middle East,
148.	In another part of the world, near to us, we face a political problem unsolved so far: the continued partition of Germany, against the wishes of the German people and, indeed, against the interest of the world. No efforts should be spared to remedy this abnormal and potentially dangerous situation.
149.	In spite of the awesome aspect of some of the dangers that menace our present-day international life, my delegation sees no reason for defeatism. With sincerity and conviction it will continue to share in the tasks which our Organization is trying to master under the indispensable guidance of the Almighty.
