The delegation of Yemen takes great pleasure in congratulating Sir Leslie Munro on his election to the presidency of the twelfth session of the General Assembly. We are confident and hopeful that this session will be a success under his presidency and through the mutual understanding of the Members of this Organization.
21.	Also, on behalf of my delegation, I warmly welcome the two new Members, Ghana and the Federation of Malaya, recently admitted to membership of the United Nations, and I extend to them our hearty congratulations and our brotherly hand which we extend to all the peace-loving peoples.
22.	When we stood up to speak in this hall during the general debate at the last session of the General Assembly, the sombre clouds of the serious events which were taking place then were filling the atmosphere with tension and uneasiness.
23.	It must be a source of elation to all of ,us that we are able to speak today in a clearer atmosphere, and with more relaxation, because most of those sombre clouds have been dissipated as a result of the firm stand taken by the United Nations and as a result of the efforts of the Secretary-General. We wish to thank Mr. Hammarskjold for his efforts and for the impartial stand he took in the Suez Canal crisis. It is our sincere hope that this Organization will take the same stand in the future every time a strong Power tries to impose its will on a weak nation, and every time serious events threaten the peace and security in any part of the world.
24.	The Suez crisis proved two important facts to the world. First, it increased the prestige and authority of the United Nations and the importance of its role in the course of world events, and it showed the world that when the Members fully co-operate, the United Nations is able to take clear decisions and to prevent serious events from developing into armed clashes.
25.	Secondly, it proved that the propaganda carried out by the colonialist Powers to the effect that Egypt and the other Arab nations were not capable of taking care of their own affairs and of fulfilling their international obligations was false. Egypt has proved to the whole world how efficiently it is administering the Suez Canal, and it is pledged to fulfil its obligations in regard to the Canal and other matters. The other Arab nations also, if left alone, can prove that they are able to take care of their own affairs and to contribute to the maintenance of peace and to co-operate with each other and with other nations for the welfare of mankind.
26.	The Government of Yemen and its people for their part, while determined to protect and defend their independence, their rights and their dignity, are also working for their advancement in the administrative, social and economic fields and for the strengthening of friendly relations with all other nations. Ever since its admission to membership of the United Nations, Yemen has been co-operating with this Organization in all its activities, especially in respecting the principles of the Charter and in carrying out its resolutions to the full extent of its capacity. We harbour only goodwill and the desire for mutual understanding with all nations. We are fully capable of taking care of our own affairs, and we are pledged to fulfil our international obligations.
27.	Unfortunately, we have not been left alone to realize these aims peacefully. The colonialist Powers, anxious to sow the seeds of discord among the Arab nations in order to prevent them from uniting and strengthening Arab nationalism, did not leave us alone. The Power which declared last year that the administration of the Suez Canal should not be left unfetted is attacking our territory every day and is not trying to fetter its own acts of aggression.
28.	It is true that some of the sombre clouds that hovered over our heads during the last session have been dissipated. But the atmosphere is still electric with tension, and the world has not yet entered into a completely calm phase as yet. The foundations of world peace are still shaky because peace is threatened from two directions: the armaments race and the crisis in the Middle East.
29.	In the case of the armaments race, all that a small nation like Yemen can do in the interest of peace is to appeal to the two antagonistic sides not to raise any obstacles in the way of the achievement of a reasonable and just agreement through the negotiations which are scheduled to take place again in the Disarmament Commission for the reduction of armaments and armed forces and the pledge not to use atomic and nuclear energy except for peaceful purposes. Humanity will be grateful to them if they do so, because a heavy burden will be removed from its back, and the people will sleep in peace, free from the nightmare of the outbreak of a third world war in which atomic and hydrogen bombs and guided missiles would be used.
30.	In regard to the crisis in the Middle East, the delegation of Yemen believes that its solution depends on the conduct and goodwill of the contesting Powers which have adverse interests in that part of the world.
31.	In view of the distorted information which has been spread about the Middle East, we want everyone to know the incontestable truth and to assure friends and enemies that no Arab State will ever attack another Arab State, and that all the Arab nations will come to the rescue of any Arab State if attacked by an enemy. They will never dissolve the national ties which bind them all and will never attack anybody except for self-defence. The Arab leaders, on many occasions, have made clear declarations to that effect. Therefore we wish that those who are seeking personal gains will desist from troubling the waters of Arab harmony and unity.
32.	The Arab States do not harbour any ill will towards anybody. Their policy is based on goodwill and peaceful relations with all the nations. If they are left alone, without outside interference or pressure, they will patch up whatever differences they might have among themselves by mutual understanding and peaceful negotiations.
33.	The concern of the Arab States does not stem from their fear of each other. It stems from the intrigues of world Zionism whose aim is to fish in troubled waters and to extend the land of Israel at the expense of its Arab neighbours. World Zionism will take advantage of any opportunity to carry out its historical programme, whose aim is to seize all the area from the Euphrates to the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.
34.	As far as Yemen is concerned, we have a problem which is causing us deep concern and which is threatening our very existence with imminent danger. No doubt, all those who have sufficient knowledge of history and geography will know that the south of Yemen, which is under the domination of the British authorities, is an integral part of the Kingdom of Yemen, and that those authorities occupied that area forcibly many years ago and imposed on its sultans and sheiks discriminatory agreements and treaties which made the British officials its virtual masters.
35.	The British forces used to attack the territory of free Yemen every time they found a pretext to do so. These attacks have lately increased in frequency and intensity until they have become continuous since the beginning of this year. Almost every day British war planes carry out air raids and drop bombs and incendiary rockets on property and unarmed inhabitants, and the tanks and infantry attack by land. Heavy losses in property and lives have been suffered by the population as a result of these attacks.
36.	The Government of Yemen wishes to declare that the continued occupation of southern Yemen by the United Kingdom is an illegal act which violates its sovereignty, international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. The repeated acts of aggression of the British armed forces and the disregard of the rights of the people of Yemen will lead to serious consequences.
37.	We submit our case to world opinion with the hope that the United Kingdom authorities will put an end to their acts of aggression and co-operate towards the conclusion of a just and satisfactory settlement of this problem.
38.	The United Kingdom authorities were not content with the attacks on Yemen. They extended the sphere of their aggression to the weak people of Oman. The people of Oman had not committed any crime except to struggle for their independence and liberation from the shackles of colonialism. The British forces have destroyed towns and killed innocent and unarmed inhabitants of Oman, because the people of Oman refused to accede to subjugation. We deplore the fact that the United Kingdom persists in following its old imperialistic and aggressive policy and we wonder when it will change to a policy based on mutual understanding and respect for the rights of other peoples.
39.	The anti-colonialist stand of the Government of Yemen is based on respect for all peoples and their right to freedom and self-determination. Naturally, being an Asian nation, we are especially interested in the future of the subjugated peoples of Asia and Africa.
40.	It is universally known that one of the basic factors which has caused all the trouble in the Middle East was the creation of Israel on the ruins of land which belongs to the Arabs, and one must add to that the colonialist policy and Zionist intrigues. It is also a well-known fact that the problem of the Palestine refugees is a product of the creation of Israel. We do not need to repeat what we say year after year about the plight of these refugees who have been driven from their homes and land to wander in the desert and to become the victims of hunger and disease.
41.	We deeply regret that the United Nations is not giving sufficient attention to the problem of these unfortunate refugees. The postponement of the solution of this problem from one session to another increases the gravity of the situation and constantly threatens peace and security in that area. This Organization was established on the principles of the maintenance of peace and the protection of the oppressed. No peace will be attained in Palestine unless the refugees are repatriated and given their full rights.
42.	In regard to the Algerian problem, we are surprised, and no doubt many people are surprised, at the intransigence of the French Government and its insistence on suppressing the Algerian nationalist movement by killing the Algerians and destroying their homes. It seems that this is the French way of influencing people and winning enemies. It is time for the French Government to abandon its attempt to impose French citizenship on the Algerians by insisting that Algeria is an integral part of France, It is time for the French Government to come down to realities and admit that there is no way out of its dilemma except by recognizing the right of the Algerian people to self-determination and independence which is coming to them anyway.
43.	A serious attempt on the part of France to solve the Algerian problem in a just and equitable manner is in fact in the interests of France itself in many ways. Because an independent Algeria will be the friend, not the enemy, of France, both sides will benefit. Then, and only then, will France liberate itself from Algeria, as the representative of Ireland has said [682nd meeting]. It will also liberate itself from the criticism of the world for its action, which has no parallel either in an advanced country or in an under-developed country.
44.	One of the subjects which are of special interest to the Asian countries is the settlement of the problem of West Irian. We see no reason why that land should not be restored to Indonesia, its mother country, and to the people with whom it has geographic and ethnic ties. We are hopeful that the Government of the Netherlands will listen to the voice of justice and liquidate this problem through friendly negotiation with the Indonesian Government, and that the General Assembly will take adequate steps to realize the hope of the inhabitants of that area.
45.	Another problem which increases international tension is the problem of Cyprus. This problem is a living example of the conduct of the colonial Powers in regard to the principles of the Charter and of their disregard of the human and political rights of other peoples. The United Kingdom cannot ignore the legal and human right of the people of Cyprus to self-determination. Here, again, we are hopeful that the General Assembly will deal with the problem in a manner which will guarantee to the people of Cyprus its liberty and its right to self-determination.
46.	The United Nations was established on the principle of the protection of the weak and unprotected nations, the guarantee of the rights of all peoples, the end of colonialism, the maintenance of peace and security and the endeavour to promote the welfare of mankind. We sincerely hope that this session will be more successful than the ones that have preceded it in the attainment of these aims.
