1. On behalf of the delegation of the People's Republic of Albania, I should like to congratulate Mr. Slim on his unanimous election to the office of President of the sixteenth session of the General Assembly.
2. At this time of serious tension in international relations, the peoples of the world are turning to the General Assembly with concern but also with hope, expecting the United Nations to live up to its responsibilities and to leave nothing undone to safeguard world peace.
3. This era is one of revolutionary changes in the I social field, in international relations, in science and in technology. Mankind has entered upon a period of unprecedented developments in all spheres. One- third of the world has rid itself of all oppression and exploitation and is successfully building socialism. For the first time in history, the Soviet Union has blazed the trail into outer space and the fantastic travels of the Soviet cosmonauts have ushered in a new age. We are happy to note that in the brief post-war period peoples have scored brilliant victories over imperialism and colonialism. Yet it is obvious that imperialism still bars the way to the liberation of peoples, to their social advancement and to peace, and that it remains a source of oppression, exploitation and war.
4. Facts show that in an attempt to retain its position and win back its forever vanished hegemony, imperialism does not shrink from the cruellest actions, and even from the unleashing of a third world war with its incalculable consequences.
5. It has created centres of tension in various parts of the world, German militarism, resuscitated in West Germany, is preparing for war. In Africa, the blood of peoples struggling against the colonial yoke flows unabated. In the Far East, Taiwan, South Korea and South Viet-Nam, which are under the heel of the United States, are being built up into bases for aggression against socialist countries. In Latin America, .after the aggression of April 1961 which ended in
utter defeat, the United States is preparing for a renewed attack on Cuba. In answer to the Soviet Union's efforts and endeavours to achieve a peaceful solution of the German problem, the United States and its allies have been brandishing arms and taking serious military measures.
It is undeniable that the aggressive policies of the United States of America and the other members of the North Atlantic bloc represent a serious threat to peace. However, the peoples are now more than ever determined to preserve peace; the forces of peace are stronger than those of war and it should be possible to prevent war and safeguard peace. Meeting at such a time, the United Nations General Assembly would make a valuable contribution to the cause of peace if it could help to stem this dangerous trend of events and to assist in bringing about a peaceful solution of the major problems of the day.
The Government of the People's Republic of Albania, which is pledged to the sacred cause of peace, would welcome an opportunity to play its modest part in the efforts for the preservation of world peace.
8.	The German problem, a legacy from the Second World War, is the most acute problem we face today and is causing deep concern to all peoples. Sixteen years have elapsed since the end of the Second World War, and still no peace treaty has been signed with Germany. That country is now divided into two States with totally different social systems and trends of development; the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany. In the former, the Potsdam Agreement/ has been fully implemented and authority lies with democratic forces, while in the latter, power is wielded by the very groups which had brought Hitler to power and even by some individuals directly responsible for unleashing the Second World War.
9.	The United States of America, the United Kingdom and France, whose actions and policies in West Germany and in Berlin have nullified the Potsdam Agreement, have consistently opposed all efforts on the part of the Soviet Union and the other socialist j States to conclude a peace treaty with Germany. They J bear full responsibility for the division of Germany, for the resurgence of revanchist militarism in West Germany and for the latter's transformation into a dangerous focus of infection in the very heart of Europe.	
10.	Lying deep inside the territory of the German Democratic Republic and occupied by the Western Powers, West Berlin has become a hotbed of provocations against the German Democratic Republic and the other socialist countries and has been turned into a veritable powder keg.
11,	Unwavering in its peace-loving policy, the German Democratic Republic has consistently tried to bring about the peaceful unification of Germany as a democratic and peace-loving State, in accordance with the interests of the German people, of peace and of European security. To that end, it has suggested, inter alia, the creation of a confederation of the two German States and the settlement of their problems by negotiation.
12,	By contrast, the Federal Republic of Germany has not only rejected all these proposals, but has been pursuing a policy of revenge and aggression. As a member of NATO, re-armed and equipped with the latest weapons, West Germany with the support of its allies seeks to annex the German Democratic Republic and openly pursues expansionist designs against other countries.
13,	A hysterical campaign has been launched in the West: there is talk of the so-called "Berlin crisis" which in fact was engineered by the United States of America itself and by other NATO Powers when the German Democratic Republic took certain legitimate measures designed to safeguard its integrity and sovereignty, and when the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries decided to end the state of war with Germany by signing a peace treaty with it this year,
14,	For our part, we would like such a treaty to be signed, on the one hand, by all the countries which took part in the war against Nazi Germany, and on the other by the two German States, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany,
15,	In reply to the Soviet Union's proposal to negotiate this peace treaty, the Western Powers are engaging in hostile actions fraught with serious consequences, If they persist in their opposition to the conclusion of such a treaty, the socialist countries will sign a separate peace treaty with the German Democratic Republic, which has expressed its willingness to do so. In that event, the question of West Berlin would be solved: it would become a free and demilitarized city, retaining both Its1'social system and its right of free communication with other countries.
18. The peace treaty, which is an act of peace, will put an end to the state of war and guarantee the boundaries and national sovereignty of the German Democratic Republic, together with the freedom of the population of West Berlin which now lives under an occupation regime; it will deal a decisive blow to the aggressive plans of the Bonn militarists and their NATO allies; it will consolidate peace and security in Europe,
17 The peoples or the world will hail the conclusion of a peace treaty with the German Democratic Republic and will Regard as enemies of peace those who oppose me treaty and engage in sabre rattling.
18. The people of Albania, which fell a victim to Nazi aggression and suffered very heavy losses in the war against Nazi Germany, has a direct interest in the conclusion of a peace treaty with Germany.
The government of the Peoples Republic of Albania, together with the governments of the other socialist countries, is ready to sign a peace treaty with both German states; alternatively, if the Western Powers and the Bonn Government refuse to sign a peace treaty, we are prepared to sign it with the German
Democratic Republic alone, for we are convinced that the conclusion of this peace treaty will solve the difficult German problem, greatly improve the international atmosphere and pave the way towards the settlement of other issues.
19.	We further believe that the General Assembly would act wisely and serve the cause of peace by endorsing the suggestion made to it by the USSR delegation [1016th meeting] to admit both German States to membership in the United Nations—a suggestion which has our wholehearted support.
20.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania views disarmament as one of the key problems of our time. The proposal for general and complete disarmament made by the Soviet Union in 1959 aroused great hopes among the peoples of the world, but in practice not a single step forward has been made to this day, because the NATO Powers, led by the United States of America, oppose disarmament and favour only control over armaments and an unrestricted armaments race.
21.	Recently, within a period of a few months, the United States has several times raised its military budget. The complement of every service of its armed forces has been increased, the term of active military duty has been lengthened and many reservists have been recalled. The production of weapons of all categories has been stepped up; measures have been taken to consolidate and further to equip both the United States military bases spread over more than thirty foreign countries and the NATO, CENTO, and SEATO military blocs. The other Western Powers have joined in these feverish preparations for war. The United States of America has turned to overt acts of provocation, such as the dispatch of further reinforcements to West Berlin and West Germany and the dispatch of United States military personnel and weapons to South Viet-Nam, Laos and elsewhere. Facts reveal the full hypocrisy of the statements made in favour of disarmament by the very same NATO Powers which have systematically obstructed all the efforts and the numerous proposals of the Soviet Union in that field.
22.	The Soviet Union, together with the other peace- loving countries, pursues its untiring struggle for general and complete disarmament, including the prohibition of nuclear tests, a question about which there is now so much talk in the West. It should be recalled, however, that it was precisely the Soviet Union's decision in 1958 unilaterally to stop these tests which forced the United States of America and the United Kingdom to follow suit and to begin negotiations in Geneva for the purpose of stopping these tests for all time. Three years of discussion, however, have shown that the United States and United Kingdom Governments are opposed to an equitable agreement on this subject. In the meantime, their NATO ally, France, has continued its own tests in the Sahara, with the knowledge and support of the United States and the United Kingdom. The United States of America, for its part, while drawing out the Geneva talks, had long since been preparing to resume underground nuclear testing and has now done so. These preparations cannot be separated from the other measures and the many military steps of a clearly aggressive nature taken by the Western Powers.

23.	The Albanian people and its Government have no desire ever again to experience the horrors of war, but they are convinced that the continuing preparations for a new world war by the United States of America and its allies create a serious danger to peace and to the fate of the human race. That is why they fully support the defensive measures recently taken by the Soviet Union. The resumption of nuclear testing by the Soviet Union is fully justified, for it not only promotes the security of the Soviet Union and of all socialist countries, but also contributes to safeguarding peace throughout the world. It represents a warning to those who are preparing to set the world on fire and an appeal to all peoples to be on the alert. The prohibition of nuclear tests must be considered and solved as' an integral part of the over-all problem of general and complete disarmament. This is the only fair and possible solution.
24.	We have noted the joint USSR-United States statement [A/4879] on the principles to be followed in disarmament negotiations. In our opinion this is a step in the right direction. The peoples of the world are now looking forward to the conclusion of an agreement on general and complete disarmament under strict international control and to the adoption of appropriate measures designed to achieve disarmament. Yet we cannot overlook the following fact: while in the statement I have just mentioned the Government of the United States advocates general and complete disarmament, the programme submitted by its delegation [A/4891] calls for only partial disarmament measures which cannot possibly bring about general and complete disarmament. This indicates once again that the United States Government is opposed to general and complete disarmament. This fact cannot fail to escape the attention of the United Nations and to incite the peoples of the world to greater vigilance.
25.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania remains resolutely in favour of general and complete disarmament. That is why it has always fully supported the well-known proposals of the Soviet Union in this regard, as they alone could lead to an equitable solution of this vital problem.
26.	The Government of the People's Republic of Albania believes that the restoration of the legitimate rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations is of vital importance to the prestige and authority of the United Nations itself. It has now been clearly established—and this is recognized by even the bitterest foes of the People's Republic of China— that without its co-operation there can be no successful solution to the most crucial problems of our day, such as disarmament and the liquidation of colonialism.
27.	Twelve years ago, on 1 October 1949, the Chinese people, 650 million strong, proclaimed the People's ^public of China, acceded to dignity, freedom and national sovereignty, and chose the path of socialism. The People's Republic of China is a great world Power, making rapid progress towards socialism and undeniably exercising a growing influence on the evolution of the international situation and on the course of history. It is steadfastly following a policy of peaceful coexistence between countries with different social systems. It is broadening its diplomatic, trade and cultural relations with other countries; it has consistently played a major part in the settlement of disputes in the Far East and it pursues a very active, policy designed to strengthen international peace
security. It has always met with exemplary forbearance the incessant provocations and aggressive policy of the United States of America, whose armed forces have occupied the Chinese territory of Taiwan and other Chinese islands and which continues to prevent the People's Republic of China from taking its rightful place in the United Nations.
28.	The question of China's representation in the United Nations is perfectly clear. China is a Charter Member of the United Nations and a permanent member of the Security Council. In fact this is not a question of China's representation, as suggested by New Zealand [A/4873], but rather one of restoring China's legitimate rights in the United Nations. It cannot be concealed that the aim of the item submitted by New. Zealand is to promote the new tactics of the United States Government, which is pursuing the same objective, namely, to continue depriving the People's Republic of China of its rightful place in the United Nations. For many years now the United States Government has been endeavouring to spread the fallacious theory of "two Chinas" and, as pointed out in the United States Press, it may use New Zealand's proposal to raise the question of which China should be represented in the United Nations and to propose the creation of some committee or other to study this matter and report on it to the seventeenth session of the General Assembly, In this way, China's seat would remain occupied by Chiang Kai-shek's man.
29.	The Government of the Peopled Republic of Albania feels that this shameful farce must cease forthwith. There is but one China, one and indivisible, in this world—the People's Republic of China—and its Government alone is entitled to speak for the great Chinese people, to represent it in international organizations and to assume responsibilities on its behalf.
30.	We strongly support the proposal of the USSR delegation calling for the restoration of the legitimate rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations. We feel that the General Assembly should consider and rapidly settle this matter, so as to oust without further delay Chiang Kai-shek's henchman from this Organization and to invite the representatives of the People's Republic of China to occupy their rightful seat and to make their very valuable contribution to the United Nations.
31.	The Albanian Government fully Supports the application for membership in the United Nations of the People's Republic of Mongolia and believes that the systematic blocking of its admission is contrary to the principles proclaimed in the Charter and to the interests of the United Nations.
32.	The events of the last few years—and especially the serious events in the Congo where the name, the resources and the troops of the United Nations have been used against the lawful Government of that country, against the freedom and the national integrity and unity of the young republic, and where blood continues to flow—have shown that the composition and organization of the executive machinery of the United Nations, particularly the concentration of all responsibilities concerning -the implementation of United Nations decisions and policies in the hands of one individual, the Secretary-General, are neither equitable nor appropriate. Already at the fifteenth session, the .Albanian Government expressed/ its support for the USSR proposal to replace the post of Secretary-General by a collective organ; our position is unchanged and we feel that such a change must be made. .
33„ The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania is of the opinion that the inclusion in the agenda, under pressure from the United States of America, of imaginary items, such as the so-called Hungarian and Tibetan questions, merely intensifies the cold war and does injury to the United Nations. Our delegation expresses the hope that the General Assembly will denounce these harmful and provocative attempts.
34.	The Albanian people and Government have always sided with peoples who fight for freedom and national independence, against colonial domination. In our era the abolition of the colonial system has become imperative; it forms an integral part of the struggle for peace and social progress. Through their heroic battle for national liberation which without any doubt will end in total victory, the peoples of colonial countries are acquiring the fundamental right to freedom and national sovereignty; they promote the cause of peace by weakening the bases and positions of imperialism. The People's Republic of Albania has hailed with the warmest sympathy the accession to independence of dozens of countries in Africa and Asia in recent years. At the same time our thoughts and our hearts go out to our Algerian brothers who for the last seven years have been waging a heroic struggle against colonial domination; to the gallant people of Angola who are sparing no sacrifices in their armed fight for their freedom; to the peoples of Oman and West Irian and to all other peoples still languishing under the colonial yoke. Recent events at Bizerta, in the Congo, in Laos and in South Viet-Nam go to show that colonialism, in its former shape or in the guise of United States neo-colonialism, still oppresses peoples and constitutes a threat to peace.
35.	In his statement to the General Assembly[1013th meeting] the President of the United States of America ignored the historical process of national liberation of colonial peoples which has been going on for many years of grim and bloody fighting, and preached "peaceful... movement" towards a "partnership of equals" between the oppressors and the oppressed; in fact he condemned the armed struggle of the peoples of Algeria and Angola which he did not even mention. The colonial peoples and all other freedom-loving nations will obviously draw the necessary conclusions from such an attitude, for they knew full well that the colonial Powers are members of NATO, and that the weapons used to kill Arab patriots in Algeria, at Bizerte, and in Oman, and Negro patriots in Angola, in the Congo and elsewhere, are NATO weapons, hence United States weapons.
36.	We note with regret that no specific measures have been taken to implement the Declaration on the independence of colonial countries and peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)], adopted by the General Assembly at its last session. We welcome the initiative taken by the USSR delegation in proposing that the present session should consider the situation with respect to the implementation of that Declaration [A/4859]. In our opinion the General Assembly must speedily
take steps to render direct assistance to the peoples still suffering under the colonial yoke in abolishing now and for ever this shameful system and acceding at an early date to freedom and national independence. Our delegation will give its wholehearted support to any constructive effort in this direction.
37.	At a time when the world situation is strained and the peoples expect international disputes to be settled through the peaceful process of negotiation, it behoves responsible statesmen to display a sense of reality and respect for other countries, be they Members of the United Nations or not. It is to be regretted that the President of the United States of America saw fit to use the rostrum of the United Nations General Assembly to utter statements which were both unfounded and insulting to the countries of the socialist camp of which my country, the People's Republic of Albania, is a member.
38.	It is easy to understand why the ruling circles in the United States of America and other imperialist countries have never been able to stomach the triumph of the socialist revolution in a number of countries of Europe and Asia; history, however, follows its own laws and not those of the United States Congress. The socialist camp is a community of free, equal and sovereign peoples which have rejected all oppression and exploitation for all time, which are guided by the most progressive and humanitarian concepts known to history and which, united by identical ideals, objectives and interests, are building a new prosperous and happy society—socialism and communism.
39.	The Albanian people chose the road to socialism seventeen years ago, after its victorious war for national liberation against the Italian fascist and German Nazi invaders and after a popular revolution. For the first time it became truly free and master of its own destiny. Before its liberation the People's Republic of Albania had been a backward agricultural country under the heel of imperialist concessionaires, medieval oppression, hunger, illiteracy, and malaria. Now, thanks to the tireless exertions of its people and the brotherly assistance of the Soviet Union and other socialist nations, it is making rapid progress towards prosperity and building socialism. Already it has an agricultural-industrial economy. Our third five-year plan, covering the years 1960 to 1965, opens the stage of Albania's transformation into a country with an advanced agricultural and industrial economy, the stage at which building of a socialist society is to be completed. Our industrial output today is twenty- five times greater than it was in 1948; the mines have become the property of the people and we are discovering new deposits of oil, copper, iron-nickel, etc. Under the present five-year plan we shall lay the groundwork for the metallurgical and chemical industries in our country. Collectivised agriculture, which is being mechanized, has doubled its production and is in full development. Our national income has greatly increased. The living conditions of our people are infinitely superior to those obtaining before our liberation. Unemployment is non-existent. Since 1955 illiteracy has been unknown. Compared with 1938, we now have five times as many physicians and agricultural experts and twenty-five times as many engineers; by 1965 these figures will have doubled and some even tripled. Malaria and other endemic diseases have been completely eradicated. A comprehensive social security system provides our workers and their dependents with all the services they require
free of charge. The net increase in population has grown from 16 per 1,000 in 1938 to 32 per 1,000 in I960: in other words, it has doubled. I believe that this is the highest" index in Europe and it is proof of the higher level of living enjoyed by our people. The popular government and socialism have brought the Albanian people freedom:, dignity and prosperity. They hold the promise of an even happier future.
40.	We have never interfered and we shall never interfere in the affairs of others; nor shall we allow anyone to interfere in our affairs. Those who wish to teach self-determination, liberty and democracy to other countries, would do better to promote them in their own country.
41.	Nowadays socialism is a world-wide system which forges ahead and acquires ever increasing importance and influence. It is an inspiration for all peoples seeking freedom and social progress. The short-sighted policy of the United States of America, which aims at reversing the course of history, is doomed to failure. We are convinced that the only reasonable policy, and one that corresponds to the true interests of the peoples and of peace, is to establish peaceful coexistence between socialist and capitalist countries: at this stage in history, this is the only possible and equitable form of relations between countries with different social systems.
42.	The People's Republic of Albania is devoting all its efforts and energy to the peaceful building lip of the country and to the maintenance of peace. It steadfastly pursues a peaceful foreign policy, which stems from the very nature of its social system and meets the vital interests of its people. No one has a greater stake in the maintenance of world peace than the Albania people, for it has experienced all the misfortunes that war entails. That is why it wholeheartedly supports the policy of its Government and watches closely over the defence of its country, of socialism and of peace.
43.	Acting in friendship and in constant harmony with the Soviet Union, the People's Republic of China and the other countries of the socialist camp—that bulwark of peace—the Government of the People's Republic of Albania, in line with its policy of peace, firmly applies the principle of peaceful coexistence with countries living under different social systems. It observes the principles laid down in the United Nations Charter, and on that basis constantly seeks to maintain normal relations and fruitful co-operation with other nations, particularly with its neighbours. We maintain friendly relations with many countries in Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America. Our foreign trade and cultural exchanges with other countries are increasing from year to year.
44.	The Albanian Government attaches special importance to the implementation of the proposal which it made in 1959, in agreement with the Soviet Government, y that the Balkans and the Adriatic should be transformed into a peace zone free of nuclear weapons and rockets. That proposal still stands and we believe that its adoption by all countries concerned would, in the present circumstances, play a positive part in relaxing international tensions.
45.	Furthermore, we support other proposals for the creation of similar nuclear-free zones in Central Europe, in the Pacific and in Africa, as representing important contributions to the cause of peace. At the same time, we cannot fail to note the intensive aggressive activities carried out in the Balkan and Mediterranean areas, particularly in recent times, by the United States of America and some of its NATO partners: for instance, the large-scale military manoeuvres recently held in the Mediterranean and in northern Greece, in conditions simulating "atomic warfare", which were obviously aimed at the socialist countries in the Balkans and at the entire socialist camp.
46.	In our times, peace is the prime requirement of all peoples. Throughout the world, the peoples are denouncing the policy of provocations and imperialist wars; they are rising in defence of peace and clamour for peaceful international co-operation. If we wish to maintain peace and save mankind from the scourge of nuclear war, all Governments conscious of their responsibilities must contribute to that end by making real efforts in favour of peace.
47.	The present situation is serious, but not desperate. We sincerely believe that the United Nations, at this sixteenth session of its General Assembly, will take effective measures to safeguard international peace and security, and thus answer with deeds the hopes that the peoples have placed in it.
