The delegation of Bolivia is happy to associate itself with the general satisfaction at the unanimous and well-deserved election of Mr. Slim as President of the General Assembly at its sixteenth session. In conveying to him my sincere congratulations, I would express my earnest hope that his responsible task will be crowned with complete success.
2.	This regular session of the United Nations General Assembly has opened in an atmosphere of grief and mourning owing to the tragic death of the Organization's Secretary-General, Mr. Dag Hammarskjold. The grievous impact of this event compels us to meditate, calmly but at length, on the great responsibilities of the moment. Man is at present faced with the gravest problem in his history: how to bring about a permanent and honest agreement for the maintenance of peace, the one indispensable condition for his own survival.
3.	Dag Hammarskjold died in the service of peace, the most noble cause of mankind; but he died while holding high the banner of this cause, and by sacrificing his life he laid upon us the obligation to keep that banner flying amid every danger. The delegation of Bolivia pays the most deep-felt tribute to the memory of the Secretary-General we have lost and of the servants of the world Organization who died with him.
4.	Fifteen years ago, when the United Nations was founded and the Charter approved, all mankind saw in that event a reason for hope. It seemed that, after considerable uncertainty, a road had been opened towards the satisfaction of the peoples' age-old longing for peace. The new international institution was to substitute reason for force, and its legal structure provided for the equal rights of nations and demolished the odious distinctions of power, race, creed and culture. It seemed that the sufferings of man over the centuries had at last convinced him that with war all is lost and that with peace, based on reason, while everything may not be gained, war, at least, is eliminated. Fifteen years have passed.
Today the number of States is twice that of those which gathered at San Francisco to inaugurate the new age of hope. New peoples voice their views in this hall. The political geography of the world has been transformed. The rainbow of flags has expanded. One would have thought that the oppression which was a feature of past eras would have disappeared or been in process of extinction, and that the hopes born fifteen years ago at San Francisco would have matured and become fully productive. Yet our anxiety, far from disappearing, has grown deeper and broader.
5.	The agenda of this General Assembly, now approved, contains items of vital importance for the destiny of mankind and the future of the Organization, Incontestably, the principal one is that relating to peace. We stand before an inescapable choice: either we find a way to peaceful coexistence within the legal order which the evolution of human civilization is creating and perfecting, or we plunge into the abyss of the complete destruction of the human race. Man's inherent anguish, which steins from the knowledge that he is mortal, becomes more acute if he loses all hope of surviving in the generations to come.
6.	Bolivia maintains and will constantly maintain its traditional support for the cause of peace, to which it has always contributed, even at the sacrifice of its own interests. Yet we know that we, like the great majority of the countries which are economically and militarily unequipped for the newest methods of warlike competition and conflict, have nothing to bring to the discussion and solution of the problem except the moral authority of our good will and sincerity in the wearying task of persuasion, in which we have persevered for so long. We know very well that force in its various forms, from intimidation to the imposition of its brutal argument by means of accomplished facts, is still the preferred way of settling controversies, disputes or conflicts of interests, for those who rely solely—and perhaps over much on their formidable military power. History teaches us that this method has, unfortunately, prevailed, rather than the moral- weight of reason and responsibility. Despite this discouraging experience, the people and Government of my country firmly believe that today, more than ever, we must maintain these values until reason conquers intransigence and gives pride of place to proper respect for the future of mankind.
7.	The threat facing us is not the same as that presented by the classical type of dispute, in which resort to force affected only those who were directly or indirectly involved. It is a threat which, if translated into action, will destroy everything and everyone— aggressors and victims of aggression, belligerents and non-belligerents, guilty and innocent, those involved and those not involved in the dispute.
8.	The people of Bolivia regard the world's entire cultural and epistemological. heritage aft a single 
whole, as the indivisible heritage of men and of peoples. Scientific advances and the new technology are due to the common efforts and discoveries of mankind. They are not, therefore, the exclusive property of anyone. From the days of cave paintings, throughout the slow and painful stages of civilization, ill have contributed to the amazing results which we now behold. Man is barely more than a creature of nature. He is not the Creator. By what right therefore does this culmination of knowledge and intelligence bring in its train the threat to exterminate life? .
9.	These familiar considerations may seem very simple ; but apparently we must return to the expedient of simple formulas if we are to realize the gravity of the danger menacing mankind5 when the complexity of argument and counter-argument draws us into a kind of vicious circle, when the debate becomes more and more heated and involved and it becomes more and more difficult to understand and solve the problem and to find a reference point in our search for a better world, free from the fear of war.
10.	Bolivia adds its voice to those of the weak countries, which have no protection other than the legal authority of this Organization, in demanding that the small group of great Powers should comply strictly with the obligations specified in the San Francisco Charter for the ensuring of peace. As has been rightly said from this rostrum, the privileged treatment given to them in the Charter requires them faithfully to discharge this responsibility. In other words, their power does not entitle them to impunity in the use or abuse of their strength; still less does it entitle them to bring about, in that way, the destruction of life. Their power gives them exclusive responsibility for the strengthening of peace. Bolivia, in its sincere desire to persuade, will never tire of repeating this injunction, voiced in 1944 by an eminent thinker of my country, the then President of its Legislative Assembly, as the sound of the world war's last battles died away.
11.	As a real and positive contribution to the fulfilment of this fervent hope of men throughout the world, my country will support any honest attempt to eliminate the possibility of war through agreements for general, complete, real and effective disarmament and, above all, for the banning of nuclear and all other weapons of mass destruction.
12.	My delegation therefore insists, as it has done on many other occasions, that the great conquests of science in the control and exploitation of nuclear energy should be used only for the constant advancement of the well-being of the community of nations. The peaceful application of these achievements of the human intellect opens up such promising prospects for progress that to go in the opposite direction, towards the abyss of the most horrible war ever imagined, would be to deny the higher destiny of mankind.
13.	At the moment, the international situation does not seem to justify excessive optimism about the future of peace. We are in the presence of a conflict of interests, in which the ever-increasing sharpness of tone is accompanied by a deployment of forces, involving even the adoption, of unilateral decisions to the effect that nuclear tests shall be resumed, with great danger to the health and safety of all peoples. If no agreement is reached in good will and good faith, it is clear that at any moment, perhaps as a
result of Unforeseeable factors, the situation can turn into a disaster. Even if we try to cling to hope until the last moment, on the theory that there will never be complete extermination, to what extremes will man be driven by the knowledge that he is on the verge of annihilation? Can the universal values of the spirit survive ?
14.	Despite this dark prospect, the delegation of Bolivia believes that this great organ of the international community, by calling upon the great,Powers to fulfil their duties and responsibilities, can and should have a decisive influence in the preventing of greater disagreement and friction which would bring the outbreak of the last of all wars nearer.
15.	Despite the often inexplicably severe criticism levelled at it on the score of its efficiency, the international Organization, in the various emergencies which have arisen since its establishment, has already carried out a praiseworthy task in accordance with its principal purposes of averting war and preserving and strengthening peace whenever its powers and resources give it the means and opportunity to do so. We are certain that, as on those other occasions, it will act resolutely to encourage and sponsor full and effective negotiations.
16.	The arms race must be ended, not merely because of the dangers it creates but because of the waste it involves; if the vast resources squandered upon it were used to promote production and peaceful progress, much of inestimable value would be done to reduce the present appalling differences between the peoples' levels of development. At the tenth session of the General Assembly, the Bolivian delegation spoke of the need to limit the armament of the under-developed countries. I believe that this proposal is still pertinent and that its principles and purposes should, indeed, be made of general applicability.
17.	The recent achievements of man in embarking upon the control of space, while creating the most extraordinary dread, have led to a new appraisal of his scientific ability. This implies the need to expedite the study of a system of rules for the peaceful use of these achievements. The great Powers responsible for these advanc3s which are a source of pride to mankind are thereby provided with a promising opportunity to reach a constructive agreement in an area not affected by the geographical tensions of the cold war. To this end, the Bolivian delegation thinks that the General Assembly should act resolutely to achieve the purpose of the resolution [1472 B (XIV)] on this matter, adopted at its fourteenth session, before the end of the period indicated in that resolution.
18.	Bolivia supports and will continue to support the principles of the self-determination of peoples, meaning the free expression of the will of the majority. This principle is for peoples what freedom is for the individual; and, since it is of universal application, we must say explicitly that we share the general concern about the situation of the German people, and particularly about the city of Berlin, which is one the critical points in the present crisis. Bolivia, true to its traditions, thinks that the only way of resolving this problem and the crisis resulting from the disputed status of Berlin is to give the principle of self-determination full play.
19.	My country warmly welcomes the admission of new independent States to the international community. In congratulating the new Members, particularly Sierra Leone which has just been admitted, we wish to draw attention to the far-reaching significance of this event for the efforts which some of the world's peoples are still making to liberate themselves. .
20.	In all its action throughout the history of the United Nations, Bolivia has resolutely supported every attitude and. expression of anti-colonialism. Our historical tradition and the glory of our long and bloody struggle for national independence oblige us to take this course.
21.	Bolivia's attitude in the Trusteeship Council has always been inspired by this principle, and we have spared no effort to fulfil the noble task entrusted to the Council by this Organization. Together with the distinguished representatives of Dahomey, Finland, Malaya and the Sudan, my country's representative— who was honoured with the post of chairman of the sub-committee set up, by an explicit decision of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to study the situation m Angola—has tried to persuade the Portuguese Government to co-operate with the United Nations in the study and eventual solution of this problem. The objections raised by that Government have, unfortunately, prevented this international body from carrying out its task.
22.	Opposed as we are to every traditional form of colonialism, we are equally opposed to any form of neo-colonialism.
23.	As an integral part of the regional system to which it belongs, Bolivia will observe all its obligations in this respect, as it has always done, in the same spirit of co-operation and solidarity that it brings to the consideration of all world problems.
24.	This unchanging attitude is based on faithful observance of the principles which inspire and define the outlook and purposes of the American regional association. Thus we advocate and shall continue to advocate respect for the principle of non-intervention in matters which are within the sovereign jurisdiction of States, because to do otherwise would amount to challenging the independence of peoples.
25.	Since 1952, my country has been seriously occupied with its own development. However, since its single-product economy is still in its early stages, development has not yet gone forward in the way and at the rate expected. On several occasions, indeed, the process has been in danger of complete paralysis and we have been faced with grave alternatives. Many factors, arising mainly from fluctuations in the price of our chief exportable product on the international market, deliberately created in disregard of the regulations and operations of the International Tin Council, have resulted in the loss of resources which were to have been used in our economic recovery plans under this programme; and the same thing may happen again.
26.	But my country needs something more than its own very limited resources if it is to develop steadily and systematically and achieve the positive results at which it aims. Last August it was represented at the extraordinary meeting of tae Economic and Social Council of the Organization of American States held in the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, at which the programme of economic development and social progress known as the "Alliance for Progress",  proposed by the Government of the United States of America, was given form in the Charter of Punta del Este.
27.	In Bolivia many of the basic reforms in this programme, such as agrarian and educational reform, are already a reality. At that meeting my Government submitted a "National Plan for Economic and Social Development", to be carried out between 1962 and 1971. The Plan was drawn up, after lengthy study and investigation, by the Bolivian National Planning Board with the co-operation of an advisory group formed by the Economic Commission for Latin America, the Bureau of Technical Assistance Operations and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and in a Decree of last July has already been approved by my Government.
28.	Its significance will be clear from the following statement of its purposes, which I venture to quote for the information of the General Assembly:
"The present Plan sets forth certain aims and considers the way in which they can be achieved. It is based on one central idea: that it is necessary and urgent to clear the way for a frontal attack upon stagnation and to direct our efforts towards the final elimination of the main obstacles, as the only means of preventing present conditions from deteriorating further and social problems from becoming more acute.
"The efforts of the last few years may largely be described as an anxious search for a solution of immediate problems without any real opportunity of tackling fundamental problems. This policy was rendered necessary by circumstances, but its results have been economic stagnation and the frustration of the hope of large sections of the country's people that their living conditions would improve. Various factors have thus accumulated in such a way that it would not now be enough to set moderate targets, designed to correct a limited number of faults or to bring about a few modest improvements while once more postponing the solution of essential problems.
"To illustrate the magnitude of the task to be faced in the near future, suffice it to say that the gross internal products, which was over $110 for each inhabitant in the three years 1950-52, was little more than $90 per person in 1957-59. This fall in average income levels, coinciding with a period of highly significant social changes which have enabled large numbers of the country's people to move into the towns, would in the long run be incompatible with social progress and even with political stability, if it were not accompanied by an urgent policy of development, holding out prospects of really significant improvement.
"Bolivia's people understand and have accepted the sacrifices required by a strict policy of monetary stabilization, whereby a timely stop was put to a process of uncontrollable inflation; yet they realize that stabilization cannot be an end in itself, but must be the means to a process of growth. The fruits of this attempt at stabilization would be endangered if this policy were not supplemented and justified by the execution of a development plan, holding out prospects of future improvement sufficient to compensate for past sacrifices."
29. We realize that political independence is hot enough to bring about the happiness of peoples. The world has not marched smoothly along the road of
progress. Great economic, social, political, geographical and cultural differences have increased the distance between countries and between societies. The opulence of the great Powers stands contrasted with the poverty of the under-developed countries which, despite their potential wealth and the efforts of their peoples, are faced with obstacles that seem insuperable.
30.	We believe that the great collective effort required by the Charter of Punta del Este, as an expression of international solidarity and co-operation, will soon enable us to solve the serious problems which beset us.
31.	The vacancy in the post of Secretary-General, caused by the death of Mr. Hammarskjold, should not and cannot continue indefinitely. It is of the highest importance for the Organization, particularly if its action on behalf of peace and international co-operation is to succeed, that immediate steps should be taken to restore the present difficult situation to normal. This is what all the peoples represented here demand. It is something which cannot be postponed, if the efficient working of the Organization itself is to be ensured.
32.	Any attempt to make such steps dependent upon prior agreement to reform the composition of the Secretariat would mean condoning the use of illegal violence against the powers of the constituent parts of the United Nations. The great majority of weak countries belonging to the Organization see the Charter as the defence, protection and guarantee of their freedom, their sovereignty and their right!" to the material and spiritual progress of their peoples. Their indisputable title to these rights, which cannot be renounced, is based on the legal structure of the international community as freely agreed upon and solemnly covenanted at San Francisco. All that is necessary, then, is that everyone should carry out his established obligations, which must be faithfully and loyally observed.
33.	Any amendments to the Charter which may be thought necessary are another matter. There are elementary reasons, relating  to the dynamics of human relationships, why no one could oppose such amendments. But, in view of my delegation's previous arguments, it is logical for us to point out that such action can be taken only at the proper time, as a result of agreements freely reached and properly studied and discussed beforehand. It should never be the result of duress in an emergency, a state of things which we should avoid by all the urgent means necessary in order to prevent the international situation from deteriorating further.
34.	When these amendments are to be studied and debated in the proper circumstances, Bolivia will contribute willingly to the common effort directed towards their adoption, in so far as they have the higher purpose of strengthening the authority and increasing the effectiveness of the Organization.
35.	With regard to the composition and powers of its main organs, we shall certainly be guided by the same principle—which is that these organs, instead of falling into a state of complete confusion and thus depriving the Organization of its reason for existence, should be so constituted that the work of the United Nations is rendered even smoother and more effective. The only way of ensuring the efficient development of the Organization is to have a Secretary-General
who cannot be deprived of his executive authority and can carry out his tasks in absolute political neutrality.
36.	Mr. President, gentlemen, may I remind all the distinguished representatives in this Assembly of the grave responsibility which mankind has conferred upon us. The destiny of man and the continuance of the wonderful civilization we have achieved on this planet depend upon the wisdom and equity of our deliberations.
