On behalf of the delegation of Japan, I wish to express to Mr. Slim our warm congratulations on his election as President of the General Assembly at its sixteenth session. Because of his great wisdom and wealth of experience in the field of international diplomacy, I am confident that he will lead this session to a successful conclusion.
138.	Also on this occasion I should like to express to the former President, Mr. Boland, the profound thanks and appreciation of my delegation. With broad vision and fair judgement, he has ably led the fifteenth regular session and the third special session of the General Assembly, despite a multitude of difficult and perplexing problems. Under his leadership, the United Nations has continued to fulfil its high task of maintaining world peace and to enhance its position as the great hope of mankind.
139.	With a heavy heart, my country joins with other Member States in mourning the tragic and untimely death, in the performance of his duties, of the Secretary-General, Mr. Dag Hammarskjold. My country has always held him in high esteem as a splendid example of devotion to the great ideals and purposes of the United Nations, which he served with such selfless dedication and great distinction. His passing is a very deep loss to this Organization. In paying tribute at this time to the loyalty, devotion and self- sacrifice of the Secretariat, I should like to express our confidence in this great international civil service. Its burdens are always heavy and the sudden and tragic loss of its chief will not make its tasks any easier.
140.	As this session of the General Assembly gets under way, I should like to reaffirm the faith of the Government of Japan in the United Nations as an Organization dedicated to the all-important task of maintaining world peace, and to emphasize that my Government supports the United Nations with all its heart and is resolved to co-operate in all the Organization's endeavours to its fullest capacity.
141.	The life of man is no longer limited to this planet. It may now advance far and wide into cosmic space. The United States and the Soviet Union are to be commended for their ventures into space—for their steady successes in utilizing fully their superior knowledge and skills in science and technology in the performance of feats unexcelled in all human history.
142.	Mankind, moreover, is receiving more and more the blessings of an increasingly prosperous and better life such as It has never known. One by one, the various peoples who have lived under colonial rule and were obliged to lag behind in the political, economic and cultural fields, have achieved independence and are endeavouring with pride and zeal to live a fuller life in self-respect.
143.	All of these facts generate in us great hope for the future of mankind. Yet we must admit with regret that tile realities of the world do not permit us to entertain any rosy optimism. Inequities of all kinds still exist and must be rectified. There are peoples who do not yet enjoy the right of self-determination.
There are peoples who have won political independence, but who still face great difficulties in consolidating their independence in the economic and other fields. There are peoples blessed with rich national traditions, but who are denied the true exercise of the right of self-determination. And there are countries which take pride in their progress and prosperity, but whose people do not necessarily fully share those benefits.
144.	In the field of international relations, a state of grave uncertainty prevails. The world lives under an uneasy peace that rests on an uncertain balance of power. Man's prowess in science and technology may enable him soon to reach the moon, but in the realm of the spiritual he lags far behind. A sense of doubt about peace is spreading throughout the world. The critical situation centring around the Berlin problem and the recent resumption of nuclear weapons tests have thrown the peoples of the world into a state of serious concern.
145.	How, we ask ourselves, can we have real peace when a strong Power, while talking peace, openly threatens other countries with displays- of its military might and its newest scientific achievements? These pose a serious challenge to the United Nations.
146.	In meeting this situation we must recognize that, in the world we live in, there are different political philosophies and social systems and different nations in different stages of economic development. We must recognize that between countries, especially between those living under different systems and conditions, there must be strict adherence to the principles of the Charter—the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, refraining from the threat of force, and absolute non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. Under these principles we must endeavour in a spirit of world solidarity to deepen mutual understanding and strengthen mutual cooperation. This, I believe, is the only way to realize true .world peace under conditions of freedom, justice and prosperity for all peoples, as envisaged in our Charter.
147.	With such concepts in mind, I should like to express my Government's views on some of the major problems which we face today.
149. The foremost of these problems is that of Berlin and Germany. On the status of Berlin, a four- Power agreement W continues to be in effect. There can be no lasting settlement of the Berlin question by unilateral denunciation of valid international agreements or by threatening gestured, There is no question but that its settlement should be reached by mutual agreement through negotiations, and that such settlement should be in accord with the United Nations Charter. Any settlement of the Berlin and German question must also, of course, fully reflect the freely expressed will of the citizens of Berlin and of the people of Germany themselves.
150. One of the major problems taken up by the General Assembly last year was the problem of the Congo (Leopoldville). As we open this session, it is a matter of disappointment and deep regret that the United States of America, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and France: Agreement (with annexed map) regarding amendments to the Protocol of 12 September 1944 on the zones of occupation in Germany and the administration of "Greater Berlin". Signed at London, on 26 July United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 227 (1956), II, No. 533.
peace restored to that country under United Nations auspices, after considerable difficulties, has been upset by renewed trouble. We must see to it that there is no outside interference in the present situation, that no additional difficulties or outside obstructions are placed in the way of continued United Nations efforts to restore peace and stability. In the interest of the Congolese people and for the very peace of Africa and of the world, the United Nations should, my delegation believes, endeavour to bring about the earliest possible stabilization of the situation. In this connexion, it is my hope that the Congolese leaders themselves, on whom the ultimate solution depends, will manifest the wise judgement they have shown in the past.
151.	Most of the newly rising nations in Africa require the co-operation of the economically more advanced countries to establish stability and to enjoy economic progress. It goes without saying that such co-operation should not be utilized by any country for political ends. Co-operation and aid should be extended solely to ensure the freedom, prosperity and development of these nations. To use economic cooperation and aid as instruments of the cold war would be an insult to these countries. The older nations must fully understand and sympathize with the feelings of the newly rising nations, which, after many years of foreign domination, want to advance on the road to full independence and self-respect,
152.	In this regard, the Japanese Government welcomes with enthusiasm the adoption at the last session of the General Assembly, of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)]. Since the Versailles Peace Conference of 1919, my country has consistently and tirelessly made every effort to establish the principle of racial equality. The eradication from this earth of racial discrimination is still a problem requiring urgent solution. It is a matter of deep regret that the concept of racial discrimination still exists in this twentieth century. As long as this situation continues, we cannot expect to establish peace, in the true sense of the term, among the peoples of the world.
153.	A moment ago I spoke of the Berlin crisis. In face of the present world tensions we feel all the more the impelling need for disarmament as an in~ dispensable means for the attainment of a secure peace. Yet, what is the situation now? The Ten- Nation Committee created for the purpose of discussing disarmament has not met for a year, and there is as yet no agreement on the question of an agency to take over this task. There has been too much exploitation of this question for propaganda purposes, and no progress. It is primarily the great Powers which have the heavy responsibility of realizing disarmament. It is up to them to make efforts in good faith to find practical approaches and concrete methods toward the solution of this important problem.
154.	It is the opinion of my delegation that the only realistic and constructive approach to the solution of the disarmament question is for the Powers concerned to adopt such disarmament measures as are presently feasible and possible of effective control and, by restoring international trust and confidence, to expand the scope of disarmament step by step. Although my delegation is in favour of general and complete disarmament, it believes that a settlement of this most difficult problem at one stroke, without adequate preparation for effective international control and supervision, Is impracticable.
155.	In this connexion/ my delegation welcomes the joint statement of agreed principles relating to disarmament [A/4879] of the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics which has just been reported to the United Nations. This is a promising sign and my delegation hopes that, on the basis of the/33 principles, renewed efforts will be made to work out a satisfactory disarmament agreement.
156.	Since last year, the Geneva Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapons Tests came to agreement on a number of provisions and gave hope that the final conclusion of a treaty was near at hand, thus removing a ,j.*eat threat to mankind. This hope has been dashed. Only a few weeks ago, in the midst of these negotiations, one of the parties suddenly and unilaterally announced the resumption of nuclear testing. Not only that, it has actually conducted such tests one after another and opened the way for nuclear test competition.
157.	This is a most regrettable and disheartening development. Nuclear power should be utilized solely for peaceful purposes, to enhance the prosperity and welfare of mankind. Competition in nuclear weapons can only increase the danger of another world war, total and more destructive than anything mankind has ever known. Having lost over 200,000 lives at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and Seeing their fellow countrymen dying from year to year from the after-effects of radiation, the people of Japan, speaking from their Own bitter experience, cannot withhold expression? their deep concern over the question of nuclear testing. Reflecting this national sentiment the Japanese Government has protested whenever and wherever nuclear weapons tests have taken place.
158.	We are also gravely concerned, apart from the question of radio-active fall-out, at the fact that the resumption of nuclear testing will mean competition in the manufacture of nuclear weapons. It is for these reasons that I express the strong hope that the negotiating Powers at Geneva will make supreme efforts to reach an early agreement, abandoning narrow self- interest and upholding above all else the security and happiness of mankind now and in the future.
159.	At the last session of the General Assembly, my delegation, jointly with many other Member States, worked actively for the passage of a resolution [1578 (XV)] for the suspension of nuclear tests and the prevention of the dissemination of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons. These efforts notwithstanding, the present world is now witnessing a worsening of the situation. My delegation therefore sincerely wishes to see the Assembly pass an effective resolution which will respond to and satisfy the crying demand of all mankind for the stoppage of all nuclear testing. To this effort we will contribute with all our mind and heart.
160.	Turning next to the recent phenomenal progress in space science, the problem of the peaceful use of outer space has become an extremely important matter. An international agreement for the prevention of the use of outer space for military purposes is ah indispensable condition for world peace. We further believe that exploration of outer space should be conducted by International co-operation, peacefully and openly and in an orderly manner. These should be the guiding principles for the use of outer space for the benefit and not the destruction of mankind.
161.	The maintenance and advancement of a prosperous world economy is, together with the maintenance of peace, one of the principal purposes of the United Nations. I should therefore like to touch upon the activities of the United Nations in the economic and social fields.
162.	The goal of the economic policies of Japan, like that of other industrialized nations, is rapid economic growth on a stable basis. This is generally being realized. But on the other hand, we cannot close our eyes to the fact that the gap in living standards between the economically advanced nations and the less developed nations is growing.
163.	It goes without saying that the primary responsibility for the economic development of any country rests with itself. Only when there is a genuine spirit of self-help can ways be found to overcome such difficulties as lack of development funds or of skilled manpower. At the same time, however, the attainment of world prosperity is the joint and urgent task of the entire world. In this sense, it is a gratifying fact that the activities of the United Nations in the economic and social fields, based upon the technical assistance programmes, are making an increasing impact on the economies of the receiving countries. I, for one, hold in high estimation the assistance that is being provided by the United Nations through these programmes.
164.	Another feature of recent life in the international community is the increasing co-operation that is being extended to the developing nations by various capital assistance agencies both within and without the framework of the United Nations. For example, the International Development Association has begun to function as a specialized agency of the United Nations. I need hardly say that it is essential to give the fullest attention to project co-ordination between these agencies and the countries concerned, so that the maximum total results can be achieved. My country desires to cc-operate fully *with these multilateral agencies and, at the same time, to extend bilateral economic co-operation to the developing countries to the maximum extent of our ability.
165.	As an Asian country and an Asian Member of the United Nations, Japan holds high expectations of the steady growth of the development of the countries of Asia. Most of them are presently making positive efforts in accordance with long-term plans. The various types of assistance that are being made available to them are being effectively utilized. But in order* to help them consummate their energetic efforts, greater help is necessary. The many unlimited areas for development require many new plans, and to make these plans possible it is desirable that the United Nations aw* other sources should provide increased assistance.
166.	From time to time, the late Secretary-General, Mr. Hammarskjold, emphasized the importance of a dynamic division of labour in the field of world trade. Nations which are in the process of internal expansion will, as a result of economic development, not only be exporting primary commodities, but also semi-processed and manufactured articles. As this development occurs, it is to be hoped that the advanced industrial countries, by providing markets for the goods of the new exporting countries, Will respond sympathetically to the efforts of these countries for economic development and growth. In some advanced countries, there is pressure to impose import restrictions or to protect home industries on the ground of relatively cheaper costs of production in the less advanced countries. I should call the attention of the Assembly to the fact that when such measures are applied, especially to countries which are in the process of development, they entail the danger of arresting their progress towards economic diversification.
167.	I should like next to touch briefly on a matter which my delegation has advocated in the past. We should like to see the United Nations study thoroughly the basic problems relating to the effective utilization on an international scale of the world's manpower resources. This problem of international labour utilization is related to the problem of emigration. On behalf of the Japanese Government, I should like to take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation to the Governments and peoples of those Latin American countries which have warmly received our emigrants, and I hope that they will continue to maintain an understanding attitude in this matter in the years ahead.
168.	In summary, Japan believes that world prosperity is indivisible and that world prosperity and world peace are also indivisible. Not only in the political field, but also in the economic field, Japan will not spare its efforts to further the cause of international co-operation, both within and outside the United Nations.
169.	I have outlined the basic position of my country on some of the major problems now before us. But more important for world peace than any other problem is the problem of the United Nations itself. When we think of the many achievements of this great Organization for world peace and welfare and when we face the many difficult problems besetting the world, we feel very strongly the need to build up even more the strength and effectiveness of the United Nations. All of its Members share the grave responsibility of co-operation in a manner that will enable the United Nations to carry out its high objectives.
170.	In order that the United Nations may serve more effectively the cause of world peace and welfare, I want to say that we, the Members, must uphold the interests of the entire world as our primary purpose. This is not an arena for the pursuit of selfish interests, nor for propaganda or vilification. I want also to say that there have been some instances among - Members of the United Nations of not conforming to its duly adopted resolutions and avoiding participation in the collective actions of this Organization. This has exposed the United Nations to the danger of losing its prestige as an agency for the maintenance of world peace.
171.	Furthermore, the financial condition of the United Nations has become extremely serious since last year. This is due to the refusal on the part of a few Members to share in the cost of the United Nations Emergency Force and the Congo operations, despite decisions of the United Nations. I appeal to the Assembly that it is our urgent duty to effect an early correction of this situation and place the United Nations on a stable financial basis.
172.	If the United Nations is to meet the problems of today effectively, its very organization must conform
to the' conditions of today. Since the establishment of the United Nations, its membership has almost doubled. This fact must be reflected in the composition of the Security Council and of the Economic and Social Council. I also believe that it is time to review the structure of the Secretariat to conform with the new situation. For instance, in order to enable the Secretary-General to perform his duties more effectively, I believe that it would be appropriate to strengthen his staff, especially at the top level, and in the employment of Secretariat personnel to give greater regard to geographical distribution, to the extent that efficiency will not suffer.
173.	In connexion with the organization of the United Nations, my delegation does not support the proposal calling for a system of three Secretaries-General. Such a system would bring into the key position in the United Nations conflicts that exist between different political philosophies and systems, paralyse the functions of the Secretariat and destroy the very basis of its international neutrality as called for by Article 100 of the Charter.
174.	The time has come when all the Members must undertake a serious soul-searching with regard to the manner in which they should cooperate with the United Nations as an agency for international peace and co-operation. To the major Powers which have permanent seats in the Security Council and the right of veto, I should like to say that they have an especially heavy responsibility for the maintenance of peace and for the sound development of the United Nations, and to express to them the strong hope that they will conduct themselves with full awareness of that responsibility.
175.	On the other hand, the proportionate strength of the voice of the other Members* has increased with the rapid rise in new membership. As their collective influence in the United Nations becomes stronger, they have the potential power to influence the confrontation between the major Powers. This carries with it a heavy responsibility. It is the duty of us all to exercise prudence and restraint and to maintain a practical and constructive attitude in handling all problems, even those relating to vital national interests. In the past sixteen years, the United Nations has succeeded in preventing such incidents as Korea, Suez, and the Congo from flaring into global war. It is gratifying to note that so much has been achieved by the United Nations, but we must not forget that its survival is entirely dependent upon the continuous and untiring efforts of all Member States.
176.	In closing this statement, I should like to say that all of us here must recognize that we have now come to a decisive stage when we are called upon to renew our resolve for world peace and for the future of the United Nations and to make our resolution effective. We must be aware of the grave responsibilities that rest on the shoulders of each of us. If we are, the first and most urgent task of this session is to fill without delay the important post of Secretary-General which now lies vacant. With full cognisance of these responsibilities, we must make this session purposeful and meaningful by upholding the authority and integrity of the United Nations in all our actions.
