

First of all, I wish to congratulate Mr. Slim most cordially and sincerely, on my own behalf and on that of the Libyan delegation, on his election as President of the General Assembly at its sixteenth session. The unanimity expressed in selecting him to preside over the work of this session and the great confidence placed in him are a very great tribute to his devotion to the cause of the United Nations, to-his experience and knowledge, as well as to his personal qualities, because his friendliness and courtesy have never failed him. I should also like to avail myself of this excellent opportunity to convey my greetings to his country, Tunisia, which is linked to Libya by so-many brotherly ties and which, through him, is associated with this token of confidence shown by the international community. The Libyan delegation therefore trusts most sincerely that he will carry out this important international responsibility successfully during this session which seems to be meeting at a particularly delicate turning-point, so far as the peace of the world is concerned.
2.	Let me also express to Mr. Boland the Libyan delegation's most earnest appreciation of the authority and distinction with which he presided over the delicate and difficult work of the fifteenth session.
3.	The sixteenth session of the General Assembly has begun in the midst of mourning and introspection. The news of the tragic death of the Secretary-General of the United Nations came as a great shock to the Libyan delegation and plunged it in the deepest sorrow. The sudden disappearance of Mr. Hammarskjold at a time when he was carrying out his mission of peace in the Congo was received in Libya with the deepest emotion and genuine feelings of anguish and grief. The world at large has lost, in him, the perfect example of an international civil servant who placed at the disposal of the United Nations his talent, his unflagging efforts, his integrity, his courage and boundless devotion to principles and ideals proclaimed in the Charter
 of the United Nations. For the whole world Dag Hammarskjold personified the active conscience of this universe of the United Nations, of which he was the living symbol in its earnest desire for peace, justice and freedom.


4. "The memory of Dag Hammarskjold and of his death in the service of the United Nations will remain locked in the hearts and minds of generations to come as the finest example of sacrifice for the noble principles set forth in our Charter and of constant devotion to the sacred cause of the United Nations. We have requested an international investigation into the circumstances find causes of this accident in order to clear the matter up and to determine the responsibility, if such there be.
5* The controversy which has been raging since the beginning of the fifteenth session concerning the role and structure of the international Organization, together with the tragic and sudden disappearance of Mr. Hammarskjold before the expiry of his term of office, place the United Nations at a decisive turning point in its history. As it has always done in the past, Libya solemnly reaffirms, particularly at this difficult juncture, its eternal devotion to -the United Nations. Having emerged as an independent and sovereign State under United Nations auspices, Libya has been guided since its independence by the earnest desire and resolute determination faithfully to abide by the ideals and principles of the Organization, because it was under its auspices the Libyan people ware able to achieve the objectives of their long struggle for freedom, dignity and independence* ^
6.	At this critical time for the United Nations, Libya considers that it is now more than ever its sacred duty to proclaim its unshakable faith in the United Nations, whose noble Meals and principles have been— and continue to be—a precious source of inspiration for men and nations of goodwill in building abetter world.
7.	Our attachment to the international Organization, which provided a fair and just solution in fulfilment of Libya's national aspirations and which has done so much since then to hasten the emancipation peoples, is buttressed by the firm conviction that this Organization has become an essential instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security and for fostering co-operation and understanding among all the peoples of the earth.
8.	The absolute necessity of Upholding the United Nations in the stress-torn world of today is fully borne out by the precariousness of the present international situation and its disturbing and dangerous developments. The United Nations is the ideal authority to afford the necessary assistance in Avoiding a clash that would mean the end of our planet. This forum is the proper place for addressing a final appeal to the world's conscience in order to halt the insane race towards nuclear warfare and to point to the path of reason in the interest of mankind's survival. This, then, is, the right time to reflect seriously Aid carefully on the shape which our Organization should take in order to serve the true interests of the international community the best conditions consistent with its institutions and structure at this stage of its growth and rapid advance towards universality. 

9.	The Libyan delegation considers that the United Nations should be the dynamic instrument of the international will as reflected in its deep-rooted aspirations. It must be the means of achieving the objectives of national sovereignty and equality, of the complete and final liberation of peoples and of establishing satisfactory levels of living. It must be the centre where the conditions are met for ensuring a lasting peace through the establishment of machinery for collective vigilance and security; it must also be the centre for proclaiming the moral code of a world in which the strong will be governed by justice and the weak reassured by the rule of international law. It is our fervent hope that the day will come when the United Nations will cease for ever to be the arena for fighting the cold war, for airing antagonism and ideological disputes, and will become a meeting place for building a world of peace, liberty and progress.
10.	We also think that the United Nations Secretariat should be the administrative and executive instrument of this dynamic expression of the international will and that it should operate in the best conditions as regards efficiency, neutrality and integrity in the service of an international community where interdependence is within the realm of human achievement and solidarity can develop in the course of time.
11.	Hence it would be difficult for us to agree to any structural reform of the Secretariat as a body based on the representation of blocs of interests, geographical groupings or ideological trends. If the administrative and executive organ, which the Secretariat is, is to operate properly, what is needed is rather a single leadership, in which decisions would be taken in the light of a well-determined responsibility and due reflection and with provision for a suitable consultation procedure.
12.	The swift increase in the membership of the United Nations and its rapid advance towards universality make it even more imperative to carry out the institutional reform of the different United Nations bodies to bring their composition into closer conformity with present realities. More specifically, an increase is called for in the membership of the Security Council, the Trusteeship Council, the Economic and Social Council and the International Court of Justice.
13.	In regard to the pressing matter of selecting a new Secretary-General, we hope that the talks now in progress between the members of the Security Council with a view to finding a successor to Mr. Hammarskjold will proceed in a spirit of understanding and in the interest of the continuity and efficiency of the Secretariat's work, and that they will soon be crowned with success. Should agreement prove to be impossible for the time being, in our opinion it would be wise for the General Assembly to take the necessary interim action required to ensure that someone is in charge of the Secretariat and to supervise its efficiency and continuity. We hope that the desire to see the United Nations develop in an orderly manner will triumph over the differences which are apparently setting the opposing blocs against one another on this important matter.
14.	The United Kingdom of Libya, in its fervent and sincere desire to see conditions established in the world for a lasting peace, has followed the developments of the international situation since the closure of the fifteenth session of the General Assembly with the closest attention and the deepest interest.
15.	The great anxiety caused by the deterioration in the relations between the East and West, particularly between the Soviet Union and the United States of America after the summit conference broke down be-, fore it could begin its work at Paris in May 1960, gave way to a wide-spread surge of hope that these relations would improve following the coming to power of a new United States administration. These hopes were strengthened by the Vienna meeting,!/ whose results seemed to augur well for a rapprochement; this rapprochement seemed to have chances of success in view of the agreement in principle reached on the question of Laos, which was the chief cause of anxiety throughout the world because of its particularly explosive nature at that time.
16.	But unfortunately these hopes were soon largely dashed as a result of the rising international tension in recent months. It is most regrettable that the Vienna meeting did not immediately produce results that would have enabled the two opposing blocs to resume the search for the desired solutions to their differences and thus to bring closer the era of mutual understanding and agreement, so essential for the achievement of world peace and security.
17.	While most sincerely regretting that East-West relations have reached a critical stage, Libya does not despair of seeing good sense, reason, goodwill and tolerance triumph over animosity, quarrels and the destructive forces of discord and dissension. In this, we join with all peoples of the world in praying that the spectre of war may be banished for ever and the groundwork laid for a lasting peace. We say to the two Powers, which developments during this century have made primarily responsible for peace and war: on this small planet, threatened with total destruction by the distressing perfection of the weapons of mass destruction, it is more than ever imperative that every humanly possible means should be used to keep the talks between the two sides in progress in an effort to find, through persuasion and reason, solutions to the differences that separate East and West. To safeguard world peace and mankind's survival, it is absolutely essential that all peaceful means should be tried out in succession until solutions are found. It is also necessary that mutual concessions should be made, however important the interests at stake.
18.	It is our view that the. small and medium-sized Powers, which are becoming increasingly numerous in the United Nations and whose very independence and existence are threatened by this antagonism of the world's great Powers, should avail themselves of every opportunity and spare no effort to assert their resolute desire for peace. They should do their utmost and use their increasing moral authority to help the two greatest Powers in the world of today to find ways and means that may lead to peaceful solutions, to overcome, by the exercise of patience and understanding, their present difficulties and to agree, for the good and survival of mankind, to the necessary sacrifices in evaluating their interests and the rather vain considerations of their grandeur and prestige. Guided by the ideals and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, the United Kingdom of Libya pursues a foreign policy based on independence and objectivity. Thus, while jealously guarding its sovereignty and upholding its spiritual and national values, Libya has succeeded in maintaining the friendliest
relations with the Western Powers and normal and correct relations with the Eastern Powers.
19.	Within the African-Asian community, Libya is continuing its efforts, in the fullest understanding, harmony and solidarity, to foster co-operation with the independent States of Africa and Asia. African-Asian solidarity, based on a community of interests and principles, is developing and growing, thus setting an example of broad international co-operation dedicated to peace, progress and the achievement of the purposes specified in the United Nations Charter.
20.	The number of members of the African family in the United Nations has recently grown with the admission of Sierra Leone to the community of free* and sovereign nations. I avail myself of this happy opportunity to extend, on behalf of the King of Libya, his Government and people, my most sincere congratulations to the delegation of this young brother country and to convey my best wishes for its prosperity, peace and progress. In building the new Africa, my country is sparing no effort in helping to create conditions that will lay rational and lasting foundations, free of prejudice and passion, for inter-African do- operation. It is in this spirit that Libya has participated in all the inter-African conferences.
»
21.	It is always a pleasure for the Libyan delegation to say that the noble values of human liberty and dignity, so gloriously upheld in the past and present by the valiant nations of Latin America, are being admirably maintained today by the emerging peoples of Asia and Africa. These values forge solid links between the African-Asian and Latin American communities and create similarities and sympathies which could be further developed in the service of peace, ideals and the-principles of the United Nations. In the midst of the serious crises, through which the United Nations is now passing, and of the troubled times in which we live., these two communities should put their moral and spiritual values and the authority of their political potential to use for the greater benefit of mankind, in order to maintain, within the United Nations and in the world at large, a balance that would do more to promote peace and sounder international co-operation.
22.	Bearing in mind its geographical position, Libya is following its natural vocation as a link between the eastern and western parts of the Arab world. Being perfectly aware of the importance of such a role, it has devoted its greatest efforts since the proclamation of its independence to the establishment of the closest and friendliest relations with all the Arab brother countries. Thus it is convinced that it is contributing, together with the independent Arab States and as a member of the Arab League t to fruitful co-operation in all sectors and hence to greater prosperity in the Arab world and a higher level of living for its inhabitants, who are fully conscious of their common destiny,
; 23. The friendly relations which Libya has managed to establish with the various political groups referred to |re essentially governed, so far as it is concerned, by Its overriding de sire to strive by every peaceful means for the triumph of the principles of self-determination, dignity and understanding, for the maintenance of ; peace and for the strengthening of international cooperation.
24. The conventional armaments race, and more particularly the competition in weapons of mass destruction, have nowadays reached such proportions
that they seriously threaten peace and security. The increase in the arsenals of the great Powers, the accumulation of stocks of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons and the dizzy speed With which the vehicles for launching these weapons are being developed add to the danger that a world conflict may break out by mistake, by chance or because of individual folly.
25.	We wish to repeat most solemnly that it is the bounden duty of the United Nations untiringly to pursue its efforts to find an acceptable solution to the disarmament problem which nowadays is one of the chief responsibilities of the international Organization in maintaining world peace and security.
26.	It is most regrettable that the General Assembly, was unable to adopt any recommendation or instruction on disarmament during its fifteenth session and that there has  been no substantial- progress since then. But it is particularly important for the United Nations to continue, without feeling discouraged or weary, its efforts for the resumption, under its auspices, of the negotiations between the principal parties, with a view to achieving general and complete disarmament under effective international control. Only a few days ago, one encouraging and comforting element emerged to revive the people's hopes that reason would prevail and facilitate a settlement as desired: the world heard of the agreement on the principles governing the negotiations on general and complete disarmament [A/4879] reached between the United States and the Soviet Union. That is another reason why the United Nations should redouble its efforts to hasten the conclusion of a definitive agreement on this important matter.
27.	The sudden interruption of the Geneva negotiations oil the control of nuclear tests, which had been in progress for some time and in which real hopes had been placed, caused great disappointment throughout the world. In addition, there was the breaking of the voluntary moratorium on nuclear tests by the Soviet Union, which considered it in its interest to resume its atomic explosions in the atmosphere. Libya and all other peace-loving States were shocked by this decision of the Soviet Union, and we are surely entitled to challenge its wisdom and opportune ness.
28.	We have severely condemned—and shall continue to condemn—the French nuclear experiments in the Sahara, which all Africa has earnestly deplored because of the danger which they represented to the health of its inhabitants and of the contempt which they displayed for the dignity of its independent States. But, without shirking our responsibilities, we must protest against all nuclear tests, especially those which are liable to poison even more the environment in which the human race lives. The Libyan delegation hopes that the final suspension of atomic tests, the prohibition of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons and the destruction of existing stocks will be agreed upon in the very near future. Such measures will protect mankind from total destruction aid will confine the use of atomic energy to strictly peaceful purposes. While hailing the admirable feats of the brave Soviet and United States astronauts, the Libyan delegation believes that man's achievements in exploiting the vast outer spaces should be devoted to strictly peaceful purposes for the good of all mankind.
	-
29.	We listened with the closest attention to the statements by President Kennedy and Mr. Gromyko [1016th meeting] and we trust that the proposals made by the world's two leading Powers in disarmament will make it possible to find some common ground of agreement towards the solution of the crucial problem of disarmament.
30.	The colossal amounts spent on the insane armaments race could be used to greater effect t«? promote the cause of peace and to help raise the level of living of many peoples suffering from the blights of hunger, disease and ignorance. The possibilities of the United Nations would be greatly enhanced and it would have adequate resources. Thus the United Nations could consolidate its admirable efforts to improve the living conditions of suffering humanity.
31.	Allow me to express here my gratitude for the attention given to Libya by the United Nations in the matter of technical assistance. It is encouraging for us and, I am sure, for the United Nations also that the conditions for substantial economic progress are becoming increasingly apparent thanks to the efforts of the Libyan people and its successive Governments and thanks to the valuable aid of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and friendly countries. This development augurs well for the inhabitants of our country in the years to come.
32.	I should like to try now, as briefly as possible, to outline the Libyan Government's views on a number of problems of special importance for international peace and security in various parts of the world: in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
33.	In Europe, as on the eve of the Second World War, the ominous clouds of tension are darkening the horizons of peace. The as yet unsettled sequels of the last world conflagration, the German question in general ' and the problem of Berlin in particular, threaten to engulf yesterday's Allies, and with them the whole world, in a catastrophe whose dire consequences for the survival of our planet were described here only a few days ago by President Kennedy in the most moving terms.	
34.	It seems to us that reason and the overriding concern to safeguard the human race should prompt the parties concerned, as indeed all of us, to do everything to avoid ah insane and final clash, because such a test of strength would mean quite simply the suicide of all mankind.
35.	The respective positions of the parties most directly concerned, as described from this platform, are indeed still wide apart, but it is also apparent that the door to peace and the path to realistic solutions have not been finally closed.
36.	The considerations bearing on European security advanced by the Soviet Union and its allies and by the United States and its Western friends in connexion with the agreements signed and the commitments entered into must, if the cause of peace is to be saved, provide some ground for agreement and an honourable basis for a realistic compromise. Of course, it is readily understandable that the declared intention of unilaterally changing the situation created under inter-allied arrangements on Germany and Berlin must inevitably lead to the kind of tension which we are witnessing today. We hope that this situation will not provoke any action which would seriously jeopardize the peace, and we also consider that negotiations are called for in order to find an acceptable solution which takes into account all the interests involved and, first and foremost, the interest of peace. Thus the United Nations must do it utmost and offer its co-operation in helping to bring the points of view closer together and bridge the gap separating the parties involved in this serious European crisis, If this crisis produces growing tension, this tension may precipitate a catastrophe on a world-wide scale. However, there is one position of principle which we have constantly defended: the challenge to the free will and self-determination of peoples, solutions based on ignorance about the unity of peoples and contesting their territorial integrity, the use of force and recognition of the fait accompli have from time immemorial been the causes of human tragedies and continuous threats to international peace and security.
37.	These points bring me logically to the question of Palestine. There we have a situation which is the most heart-rending chapter in the history of mankind. The most heinous crimes have been committed against the fundamental rights of groups of human beings with no protection against mass expulsion, living under a reign of terror and banditry; the sacred rights to private property and to an eternal homeland have been scandalously violated. The tragic result is that more than a million Palestinian refugees—Arabs, Christians and Moslems have been living in exile in ' conditions of misery and want since the aggression, launched against their homeland. The principles of the United Nations and the successive resolutions of the General Assembly have been trampled underfoot, and the most arrogant challenge continues to be levelled, at the international Organization by those responsible for the aggression against the Arab homeland in Palestine.
38.	The United Nations must find a just and fair solution which will amend the unspeakable wrongs done to the Arabs of Palestine and to their country's integrity. It is imperative for the United Nations to do everything within its power to execute the resolutions of the General Assembly and to enable the Palestinian refugees to return to their homes, to their fields and to the land of their ancestors. It is also of the highest importance that our Organization should continue to shoulder its responsibilities in this tragic affair by unstintingly providing the Palestinian refugees with all the material and moral assistance which they are entitled to expect from it.
39.	In occupied Palestine, the Arab minority continues to be the victim of extortion, discrimination and the most abusive and outrageous legislation. The Urban and rural populations and the Bedouin of the Negev continue to suffer from unjust measures which threaten their very existence. Commenting on the reasons for the recent demonstrations by the Arab population against the tyranny and massacre of the occupying Power, the1- correspondent of The New York Times wrote the following article in the issue of 22 September 1961, and I quote in English in order to adhere to the original wording:

"Israeli Army officials declined to comment on the demonstrations. Some said privately, however, that although the situation was under control at the moment, it could only worsen in the long run.
"The dissatisfaction felt by Arabs in Israel, these officials said, is partly a result of frustration at their inability to find employment that pleases them. 
225

 

  
Israeli Arabs rarely find good jobs outside their villages and towns.
"The bitterest pill for the Arabs by far is the military government, Perhaps 180,000 out of the 220,000 Arabs in Israel live under army rule. They are under curfew restrictions and are confined to certain areas.
"In addition, they are not given access to civilian courts under ordinary circumstances but are subject instead to courts-martial."

40.	That is a situation on which no comment is necessary, and the United Nations is in duty bound to take all possible action to end this serious situation which violates the most elementary human rights.
41.	In Algeria, in the very heart of the Maghreb, the war continues on an increasingly murderous scale. The sons of Algeria and France are falling daily in fights to the death. The sufferings and miseries of the civil populations beggar description. In the regroupment camps, over two million Algerians are living in the most wretched conditions. The outrages of irresponsible groups of extremists make life unbearable in the principal Algerian cities, The prospects of France and of democracy in Algeria are in the most serious jeopardy. Hundreds of thousands of Algerian refugees have been forced to seek asylum in neighbouring countries: in Libya, Tunisia and Morocco. But one vital fact remains. The Algerian people are irrevocably resolved to fulfil their legitimate aspirations to achieve human dignity and national independence. They have accepted and will continue to accept every necessary sacrifice however great it may be. Nothing will stop them on their triumphal march towards complete liberation. But the colonial war in Algeria is a serious obstacle to prospects of peace in Africa and to the normal development of North Africa.
42.	After seven long years of heroic struggle, the Algerian nationalist revolution has taken firm root at the international level, because of the justness of its cause , and at the domestic level because of the simple fact that it has always represented the genuine will of the people and is the means for achieving its most earnest national aspirations.
43.	Since 1955 the question of Algeria has appeared on the agenda of the regular sessions of the General Assembly, where each time it has formed the core of the important discussions of which we are aware.
44.	Now that the General Assembly is about to take up this important question once again at its sixteenth session, it is appropriate to sum up the situation in the light of the conclusions reached by the international community as expressed by a very large majority at the end of the fifteenth session. •
45.	First of all it is recognized from now on that the 1 situation in Algeria constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security. It naturally follows from this that the myth to the effect that the question of Algeria is a French domestic matter is rejected once and for all.
46.	Secondly, the United Nations recognizes that there are two parties to the dispute: the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic and France, The General Assembly actually declared, at its fifteenth session, the two parties concerned had accepted the right of self-determination as a basis for solving the Algerian problem'.
47.	Again, the United Nations has recognized the right of the Algerian people not only to self-determination but also to independence. In asking that territorial unity and integrity should be respected, the United Nations in fact condemned any French attempt to partition Algeria.
48.	Then the international Organization has emphasized the overriding necessity of providing adequate and effective guarantees to ensure that the right of self - determination is exercised successfully and justly.
49.	Lastly, the responsibility of the United Nations is engaged in the matter of guaranteeing the impartiality of the referendum; it has admitted that it was under an obligation to help ensure that the right to self- determination was exercised successfully and justly.
50.	These fundamental conclusions arrived at the United Nations at its fifteenth Session are, in our opinion, a positive contribution towards a just and honourable solution of the question of Algeria.
£1. From the internal point of view, it is most instructive to note that the armed resistance of the nationalist movement has been strengthened remarkably by the overt action of the Algerian masses since the beginning of December 1960. This open and unequivocal support given to the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic emphasizes the unanimous desire of the Algerian people to become independent. The frequent mass demonstrations by the people brandishing the emblem of independent Algeria in front of the tanks of the army of occupation is an eloquent indication of the direction which the country is taking in freely choosing its destiny.
52.	At the bilateral level—I mean at the Franco- Algerian level—the statement of 16 January 1961, in which the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic indicated that it was ready to enter into negotiations with the French Government concerning the conditions for a free consultation of th.2 Algerian people, provoked a positive reaction, expressed in the communiqué of 15 March 1961. In ft the French Government expressed its desire for the holding of talks, through an official delegation, on the conditions for self-determination. So the conferences were held at Evian and Lugrin. Unfortunately the negotiations have not yet led to conclusive results, having been impeded by the rigid ideas of the French negotiators concerning the Algerian Sahara, which they wanted to make an issue, and concerning the question of the European minority in Algeria. Mr, Thism, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, made some clear and discerning remarks on these two problems in his brilliant statement during the present general debate (1012th meeting). We fully agree with his conclusions.
53.	The sovereignty of Algeria over the Algerian Sahara and the generous offer made to the members of the European minority, wider which they would be allowed to opt for Algerian nationality, are, in our opinion, important elements in any peaceful solution in Algeria. At the Press conference on 5 September 1961, General de Gaulle seems to accept the first point about Algerian sovereignty over the Sahara. We hope that ah even more realistic view of matters on the part of France will make it possible to resume the talks with brighter prospects of success*
54.	Now that my delegation wishes to reassure the Algerian people of Libya', s full and unwavering support in their historic struggle for the fulfilment of their national aspirations in self determination and independence, I should like once again to express the most fervent hope that, thanks to the valuable co-operation of the United Nations, a new era will dawn in the relations between independent Algeria and France based on mutual respect, sovereign equality and the most fruitful co-operation.
55.	As in the case of Algeria, Libya assures the valiant people of Angola of its closest support and deepest sympathy. The heroic struggle of the Angolan people to shake off the yoke of colonial domination and fulfil its national aspirations is part of the great liberation movement which is galvanizing the whole African continent. It is the duty of the United Nations to lend its support to the people of Angola and to carry out on their behalf the obligations set in the Charter of the United Nations. The Angolan nationalist revolution is the result of the oppression and exploitation of which the Angolan people have been the victims. We venture to hope that Portugal will harken to the voice of reason and of what is in its true interest by rapidly putting a stop to armed repression and proceeding as a matter of urgency, with the reforms called for by the development of the times, The era of colonization and exploitation is over for ever. International co-operation is possible only if based on the sovereign equality of nations and an understanding of their legitimate aspirations.
56.	Since 1960 Libya has been following the developments in the Congo (Leopoldville) with particular attention. The Libyan Government and people have constantly advocated the need to maintain the unity and territorial integrity of this young African brother country . The meeting during the last few months of the Parliament and the formation of a central Government in accordance with constitutional procedures were welcomed in my country with the deepest satisfaction. We hope that after the trials and numerous sacrifices which their country has undergone, all the Congolese leaders will realize the urgency of doing their utmost to overcome the last obstacles in the way of their national unity and the integrity of their homeland. I should like, on this occasion, to convey to the Congolese Central Government the assurance of Libya's co-operation in the work of nation-building which it has undertaken. I should also like to repeat our appreciation of the efforts made, often under trying circumstances, by the United Nations representatives in the Congo in carrying out the mission assigned to them by the international Organization.
57.	Being deeply attached to the fundamental human freedoms and to the inherent rights of the Africans to live in dignity on the land of their ancestors, Libya considers that the serious situation prevailing in South Africa constitutes a serious threat to peace and security and a permanent source of friction. Moreover, this situation is a most serious violation of the principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. The systematic policy of racial segregation and discrimination, blindly pursued by South Africa, is a serious source of anxiety for us. Propounded as a policy in the national interest, the racial supremacy imposed by force on a large majority of Africans is : creating a highly explosive situation in the south of Africa. Arbitrary action and the denial of fundamental freedoms seriously endanger the peaceful development of this part of Africa and harmonious co-existence in a multi-racial community.
58.	Because of the complications and steadily deteriorating situation, the United Nations ought, now more than ever, to take the necessary urgent steps to enforce respect for human rights. In view of the defiance of the United Nations by the Government of South Africa in the matter of its racial policy and its attitude to the problem of South West Africa, radical sanctions should be adopted.
59.	The Libyan delegation will devote increasing attention and continue to make its contribution to the consideration of the matters relating to the Territories that are not yet self-governing. Encouraged by the results already achieved in this respect, we hope that the United Nations will be able to find felicitous solutions to these problems in accordance with the principle of the right of self-determination of peoples.
60.	The peoples who have had the misfortune to bow to foreign domination have agreed to considerable sacrifices in their struggle to regain their freedom and safeguard the integrity of their national heritage. The founding of the United Nations strengthened the hopes of the dependent peoples in the triumph of their just cause. The United Nations, whose efforts in this direction have been crowned by the accession to independence of many countries, has passed a milestone with the adoption, at the fifteenth session, of the Declaration on the abolition of colonialism for ever and the granting of independence to all dependent peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)]. We are convinced that it will continue its efforts untiringly to ensure the systematic implementation of that Declaration until all the dependent peoples can freely determine their own destinies.
61.	The delegation of the United Kingdom of Libya is greatly honoured and very happy to greet, from this world platform, the delegations of the States Members of the United Nations. As we assure them of our most loyal co-operation, we should like to express the hope that the General Assembly will enjoy the fullest measure of harmony in its deliberations and the greatest success in its work.
62.	This session is being held at a decisive turning- point in our current history. The eyes of the peace- loving peoples are turned, at this critical juncture, on this Organization in the hope that the conflicts dividing the world will be settled there. I conclude with the wish that these hopes may not be disappointed and that the United Nations may take upon itself unconditionally the solemn obligation to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and to build a better world in peace, progress and co-operation.
