On this our first opportunity to address the General Assembly, I should like, in the name of the Philippine delegation, to express to Mr. Slim my heartiest congratulations on his election to the Presidency of the sixteenth session. We are extremely pleased at the election for the first time of a leader from the continent of Africa to preside over the deliberations of this chamber. We are confident that with his wisdom and experience, tact and proven diplomatic ability, our session will be fruitful and constructive.
63.	We likewise commend the representative of Ireland, Ambassador Boland, President of the fifteenth session of the General Assembly, for the outstanding manner with which he presided over the meetings of that session.
64.	Recently, a new sovereign nation was born. It is always a deep satisfaction to the Philippines to be able to participate in the admission of additional Members to this Organization. We welcome Sierra Leone. Its presence here is another token of the extension of the frontiers of freedom and liberty. It is the hope of the Philippine delegation that other countries, including Algeria, will soon find their respective seats in the Assembly.
65.	We begin our work in the shadow of a tragic event—the death in Africa of our distinguished Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjold. He died in the line of duty and in the service of peace.
66.	Mr. Hammarskjold was a man of exceptional qualities, and it is hard to find his equal to cope with the difficulties of the present time. That is why his death poses a problem that involves the very existence of this Organization. He was not only a diplomat and distinguished economist, but also an exemplary administrator.
67.	The functions of the Secretary-General comprise not only the execution of the mandates of the General Assembly, but also the effective, complete and orderly administration of all United Nations offices and personnel. By express provision of the Charter the Secretary-General is the chief administrative officer of the United Nations. The Charter likewise provides that in the performance of his duties the Secretary-General or any member of his staff "shall not seek or receive instructions from any government or from any other authority external to the Organization". Finally, the .Secretary-General and his staff are enjoined to "refrain from any action which might reflect on their position as international officials responsible only to the Organization".
68.	As a corollary to the foregoing, and to preserve the independence and integrity of the Secretariat, every Member of the United Nations is under obligation "to respect the exclusively international character of .., the staff and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of their responsibilities".
69.	We believe that there is a consensus in this body that Mr. Hammarskjold was performing all the duties of the position of Secretary-General with exceptional ability and efficiency and that he helped in the smooth functioning of the United Nations in its relations with all specialized agencies and financial institutions related thereto. Unfortunately, we now find ourselves facing an unexpected situation and in consequence we have to meet new realities. Our distinguished Secretary-General is here no more, and it must be the concern of all the Members of the United Nations to give continuity to the position as well as to the authority and duties of Secretary-General as envisioned in the Charter. Our delegation is of the opinion that it would be advisable for us in this new task to maintain the organizational system which has been in effect since the founding of the United Nations, which has been proven to most to be both effective and practical. Naturally, we are opposed to any division or dilution of the powers of the Secretary- General because it would reduce the effectiveness of the office and lead toward disorganized management. We are solidly and unreservedly behind the continuance of a single executive for the United Nations Secretariat responsible only to the Organization as a whole. It is our firm conviction that the Secretariat should be insulated from power conflicts and political struggles. We feel that the selection of a successor to Mr. Hammarskjold is of extreme urgency and must be resolved speedily. Immediate action should result in continued smooth functioning of the General Assembly, its Committees and the United Nations in general. This would also effectively prevent the disintegration of the Organization for lack of a head, administrative direction and control.
70.	It is most important and even essential, therefore, in the light of what has just been said, that the person assuming; this post should be both seasoned and mature in the diplomatic and political sense and at the same time a proven executive administrator.
71.	Countries like ours are ever more interested in the immediate solution of this problem, for the position of Secretary-General has been an instrument to harmonize the actions and differences of big and small nations in the achievement of the aims and purposes of the United Nations. We are, therefore, deeply concerned over the divergence of opinions which is causing the delay in the selection of a Secretary- General.
72.	The Philippine delegation, in the interest of an effective, responsive and impartial administration of the United Nations, would support any proposal which would take into account the provisions of the Charter, and we hope that whatever arrangements are made to fill the vacancy, the staff of the Secretariat as well as the Members of the United Nations, would recognize the full authority of the incumbent to make such decisions as are implicit in his position as executive head of this world Organization.

73.	We recognize that there is need for studies to be made with a view to effecting changes in some sections of the Secretariat to make it conform to the growth of membership and the expansion of its work and functions. But we must reject any formula which, even by the slightest implication, would lead to interference with the Secretary-General or functions of the personnel of the Secretariat by any country or group of countries.
74.	It has become evident to all that the increase in the membership of the United Nations requires that the present composition of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council be reviewed. Whereas for the last fifteen years the total membership of the United Nations has doubled, this growth up to now has not been reflected in these Councils. The Philippine delegation takes the position that the new countries which now comprise a large proportion of the total membership, and older Members which have not had adequate opportunity to serve, should be given a voice in these important Councils. An increase in the membership of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council will doubtless make these bodies more realistic and responsible in carrying out their important functions effectively.
75.	In recent weeks some of the major Powers have embarked upon a resumption of nuclear testing. This resumption has indeed created anxiety, if not distress, all over the world. In the course of their statements before this body, some delegations have informed the Assembly of the alarming increase in the intensity of radio-active fall-out recorded in their countries since the resumption of atmospheric tests. It is known that such radio-active fall-out endangers the health and life of mankind and that no adequate protection has so far been devised. Radiation is universally recognized as a hazard to human life, and all of us must be convinced that the perilous consequences of nuclear testing could become a scourge to mankind.
76.	We, therefore, join those delegations which have already taken the rostrum, in appealing to the Powers concerned—whether conducting tests or just preparing to do so, in the atmosphere, in outer space or elsewhere—to impose upon themselves voluntarily and in the interest of the world a moratorium on any and all kinds of tests. It is to be hoped that the overwhelming expression here by the Members toward? such an end will create a new consciousness of the imperative need for the immediate cessation of all tests.
77.	In discussing the question of disarmament, we have in our minds the principle in the Philippine constitution outlawing war as an instrument of national policy. Before proceeding further, we are pleased to commend the address of President Kennedy of the United States to this Assembly outlining a comprehensive programme towards world disarmament [1013th meeting]. He also gave us a picture of the' troubles of this world which could help focus attention on the magnitude and urgency of the task of building for peace.
78.	There are many trouble spots in various parts of the world today, and South-East Asia, which includes my country*, the Philippines, is no exception. Here, as in other parts of the world, the big nations are the main protagonists, but the smaller countries within these troubled areas are in constant danger of being engulfed at short notice. We see today uncertainty in political and military conditions in several countries in South-East Asia. The dangers of war are becoming apparent, and national upheavals are growing in alarming proportions. Such a situation compels the countries within the region to devote substantial portions of their resources to their own defence and provide safeguards against infiltration and subversion. The result of this is that resources which could otherwise be used for much needed economic and social progress have to be wasted in military spending without tangible benefits to the entire population.
79.	At this juncture, some delegations have expressed the view that nuclear testing, as it is now being carried out, must be related closely to the arms race. It has been stated, furthermore, that- these tests may even be considered as a prelude to the production of arms and weapons more deadly and destructive than the ones now existing.
80.	We feel that, unless and until the big Powers agree to disarm, many millions will go down the drain not only by limitless spending by the strong Powers but also by wasted effort on the part of the smaller nations. Considerations of this and a similar nature have impelled some countries, including my own, to enter into defence arrangements with stronger friendly Powers for purposes of protection. Pending the advent of the climate of peace which is long awaited, the Philippines has seen fit to permit the establishment of bases by a friendly Power as a deterrent to war and as a protection against surprise attack. Let it be known, however, that these bases have been agreed upon to be purely for defensive purposes and have been negotiated freely and voluntarily, with full respect for the sovereign powers of the parties concerned.
81.	It has been said here that "the weapons of war must be abolished before they abolish us". With this in view, we join other delegations in an appeal for a renewal of honest efforts aimed at complete and general disarmament under international control. We endorse the general principles arrived at by both the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. We express the hope that these general principles will be implemented.
82.	We will support any proposal intended to prevent and prohibit the transfer or further dissemination of nuclear weapons from one country to another. As a Stage in the process of industrialization, we should like, of course, to see the atom harnessed for useful and constructive purposes. We should like to see mankind closer to the era of Atoms for Peace.
83.	Like most of the new and small nations, the Philippines is exerting every possible effort towards an extensive development of its resources. Through international co-operation and the partnership of domestic and foreign capital, our industrial capacity has increased substantially in the last decade; It is with satisfaction that I state here that the present trend towards industrialization and economic and social development in the Philippines is due mainly and in great measure to the wisdom, vision and dynamic "economic nationalism" of His Excellency, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines. However, like other countries not yet fully developed economically, we still depend mainly on the export of raw materials for our income and foreign exchange earnings. Consequently, we have not moved away
enough from our original position of dependency, continuing to be as ever before subject to the requirements, controls and inordinate fluctuations of the markets dominated by the industrialized and richer countries. In such circumstances heavy dependence upon the export of raw materials has slowed down the social and economic progress in many parts of the world and not less in our own country. The people in these raw-material producing countries are forced by economic circumstances to suffer low standards of living. Accordingly their wages and per caput incomes are out of proportion compared with the higher individual incomes prevailing in the highly industrialized countries. It is true that during the last decade the United Nations and the specialized agencies, as well as financing and lending institutions related to the United Nations, have extended assistance for the industrial and economic development of the less developed areas. Sadly enough, the conditions prevailing in such countries have not changed as much as would be desirable, and the gap between the industrialized and unindustrialized countries not only has not been narrowed but, in general, has been aggravated.
84.	It is often suggested that industrialization is the most effective means of hastening the economic development of the under-developed and less developed countries. But it must also be realized that in the initial stages any plan for industrial development brings about serious financial problems, even though they can be expected to taper off in the course of time. Likewise, the general theory of replacing imports through industrialization and production of equivalent goods is an excellent one, but this per se gives rise to special problems of financing. Invariably, therefore, the only recourse open to the countries confronted with these and allied problems is to seek loans, the heavy amortization and interest charges of which, at least temporarily, weaken their economic structures. We feel that present borrowing facilities available to Members of the United Nations are by no means sufficient to meet the requirements and the growing demands of smaller and new nations.
85.	We all believe in the necessity of an expanded interchange of goods, commodities and services among all nations. But we must realize that, without improved world conditions, free communications and elimination of barriers, the accomplishment of such objectives does not appear likely in the foreseeable future. In recent years, we have seen the emergence and establishment of regional economic blocs and groupings. But until we see them working in harmony, the expansion of trade will be a myth and, therefore, the interchange of commerce must continue at its present limited pace.
86. I wish to express my appreciation to the representatives of Malaya and Thailand for making reference to the joint efforts of their countries, together with mine, in establishing the Association of South-East Asia. The basic objective of this Association is to foster closer economic, social and scientific cooperation between the members and thus enable them better to comprehend their mutual problems. Philippine participation in this Association is under the personal direction of our Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Serrano. We hope for great success in this endeavour.
87. The position of the Philippines on questions regarding the rights of nations and peoples to self- determination is well known. Fortunately, the Philippines achieved its independence through a peaceful process and our transition to sovereignty was orderly, resulting from normal international negotiations.
88.	Our record in the United Nations shows that we have joined many nations in the espousal of proposals for the termination, as speedily as possible, of all traces of colonialism. Naturally enough, we are against the maintenance in one form or another of colonialism or neo-colonialism, in any part of the world. We strongly believe that peoples in every continent are entitled to live freely and without interference or pressure from any external source and to exercise their right of self-determination as to their political status. At this juncture, it is well to recall the Charter, which enjoins all men irrespective of race, religion, creed, or colour to develop friendly relations among themselves and to "practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
89.	The Charter likewise enjoins the people all over the world to "establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and.. .in international law can be maintained". Viewing the Berlin question in this context, the Philippines can only reaffirm its conviction of the necessity of traditional respect for international treaties and commitments. We here express the hope that the parties concerned should find their way clear to peaceful negotiations and settlement.
90.	Our respect for the provisions of the Charter constrains the Philippine delegation to continue, in present circumstances, to oppose the membership in this Organization of Communist China, which has flouted the cause of peace, has challenged and fought against the collective will of the United Nations, and has, through aggression, infiltration and subversion, disregarded the peace and territorial integrity of its neighbours and of many other countries.
91.	It is our hope that, under your wise guidance and able direction, we shall move together towards harmony and peace.
