38. Mr. President, when I had the privilege of visiting your country recently I voiced the hope that this year's session of the General Assembly of the United Nations would be convened under your Presidency. Today it is my great pleasure to express to you the sincere congratulations and the satisfaction of the Austrian delegation on your election to the highest office of this Assembly.
39. Your election is evidence of the high esteem which you personally, and your country, enjoy among the nations whose representatives are assembled in this hall. The fact that for the first time in the history of this Organization the representative of an Eastern European country has assumed the Presidency is also a symbol of the detente which has, at long last, replaced the acrimony of the cold war and the state of tension in Europe, and has made it possible to establish to an ever increasing degree normal relations between countries of different social and political systems in Europe. To Austria — throughout the centuries chosen by history as a bridge between the nations in the North and the South, the East and the West of Europe — this is indeed a matter for deep satisfaction.
40. I should also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the services rendered by your predecessor, Ambassador Pazhwak of Afghanistan.
41. You have taken the Chair at this session, Mr. President, in an international situation marked by tension, conflicts and unsolved problems.
42. The Assembly convenes only a few months after the outbreak of armed hostilities in the Middle East, which once again have brought death, destruction and suffering to large parts of that area.
43. I must express here my sincere regret that neither the Security Council nor the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly have succeeded in their attempt to solve the crisis. While we note with relief that it has been possible to establish a cease-fire and to hold the major fighting on the battle-fields, we are deeply distressed that it has still not been possible to bring peace to the Middle East. The basic and deep-rooted problems of the area remain unresolved. Tension and belligerency persist, sporadic fighting recurs along the armistice lines, and it has not been possible to liquidate either the causes or the consequences of the recent outbreak of hostilities. And hundreds of thousands of refugees have become the innocent victims of the war, further increasing the large number already existing in the area since 1948. Austria has indeed seen in its recent history much of the distress of refugees, and it is the same human misery, irrespective of whether these refugees are in Europe, in Africa or in the Middle East.
44. It is our sincere hope that the present session of the General Assembly will be able to make a constructive and effective contribution towards a settlement of the crisis in the Middle East, and to a just and lasting solution of the complex problems of the area.
45. Any such settlement, we believe, will have to be based on the recognition of certain fundamental principles. Among these will have to be the respect for the territorial integrity of all nations of the area, and of the right of all peoples to live in peace and security. Recognition of this principle, which forms an integral part of the Charter of the United Nations, is indispensable within the community of nations. From this, it follows that all States must settle their international disputes by peaceful means, and refrain from the threat of force or the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of other States. This means that the belligerency in the Middle East should come to an end.
46. Of equal importance, and as a logical consequence of the first principle, there will have to be recognition of the fact that military occupation of the territory of other States as a result of war or hostilities can be no title to territorial gains, and that occupation forces will have to be withdrawn.
47. These principles appear to be the essential elements of a settlement in the Middle East.
48. Other important issues will, of course, be a settlement of the refugee problem, the problem of navigation through international waterways in the area, and the question of the special religious interests in the City of Jerusalem, which latter, we hope, will find a solution by some form of international arrangement.
49. The United Nations can be of great assistance in establishing an armistice and in maintaining a certain measure of tranquillity in the Middle East. The past twenty years have shown, however, that all efforts in this respect have not been sufficient to bring peace to the area, nor to prevent the recurrent outbreak of hostilities. We must realize that in the last resort a peaceful settlement in the Middle East will be possible only if the nations of the area themselves are willing to co-operate in this effort.
50. As in the state of tension which still exists in the Middle East so shortly after the end of the war immediate contacts between the parties to the conflict will be difficult, the designation of a special representative of the Secretary-General, with the mandate to establish contacts with all sides and assist in re-establishing peaceful conditions in the area, could be of considerable value. Should it appear difficult to appoint one person for that task, one might consider the appointment of a special group, headed by a person of recognized international standing.
51. Any rapprochement will naturally have to be slow and gradual. But on behalf of my Government I appeal to all countries of the Middle East to recognize their historic responsibility. Theirs is a history of thousands of years, theirs is a culture which had reached the highest achievements at a time when Europe and America were only just awakening to their role in history. Theirs is a region which has given to mankind three of the world's great religions and the message of peace among men. May the people of the Middle East, aware of their place in the history of mankind, find, at this critical hour, a new common basis for bringing back peace into their homelands.
52. The disturbing situation in the Middle East is unfortunately not the only element contributing to an international situation which the Secretary-General has characterized as having, over the past year, not only not improved, but in fact deteriorated considerably.
53. Foremost among the factors contributing to this development is, of course, the continuing war in Viet-Nam. Apart from the tragic human suffering which every day of prolonged hostilities inflicts upon the people of Viet-Nam, its impact and its international repercussions represent a serious danger to international peace and security. It is therefore imperative to seek a settlement of the conflict before it is too late, and before the steadily increasing involvement of outside Powers makes a solution by agreement unattainable. And I agree with those speakers who have already expressed the view that a solution by agreement, a settlement through negotiations, is at this stage the only hope for a termination of the hostilities and for the restoration of peace to the people of Viet-Nam.
54. It is our hope that that attitude will be adopted by all parties involved in the conflict, and that it will thus be possible to move the Viet-Nam conflict from the battle-field to the conference table, to bring about an end to the fighting and to reach a solution by agreement and in accordance with the wishes of the people of Viet-Nam itself. Mutual concessions and a de-escalation of military activity will be necessary to prepare the ground for a meeting at the conference table. We can only address an appeal to all parties concerned to take whatever initial step may appear likely to set in motion a process tending towards peace, and also an appeal to all Governments to assist in this effort.
55. Another international conflict has been overshadowed in recent months by the violent developments in the Near East and in Viet-Nam. But the Assembly should not forget that a solution to the problem of Cyprus has still not been found. Austria, together with several other countries, has responded to the appeal made by the Secretary-General and has sent a medical contingent and a police contingent to serve with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus. My Government is willing to continue its support of the United Nations action in Cyprus. But the parties directly involved must understand that the United Nations operation in Cyprus cannot go on forever, and that they do not relieve those directly involved in the dispute from their primary responsibility to reach a solution to the question of Cyprus as speedily as possible.
56. The fact that it has not been possible for the United Nations to find a solution to the crisis in the Middle East, or to achieve a settlement of the dispute in Cyprus, or to make any meaningful contribution towards a solution to the conflict in Vietnam, has resulted in widespread criticism of the United Nations and considerable disillusionment in many quarters. Some speakers from this rostrum have spoken of a crisis of confidence in the United Nations. I share the regret that the United Nations has not been able to achieve results in these questions, but I believe the criticism is not fully justified. The United Nations, after all, only reflects the political constellations in the world, The Organization is not a world tribunal to make or enforce political decisions; it is only an instrument which Member States can use if they are willing to co-operate. If the willingness to co-operate is absent, this will naturally be reflected in what the United Nations can achieve, or, rather, cannot achieve.
57. The recent crisis in the Middle East, as well as the prolonged operations in Cyprus, have shown the limits but also the usefulness of United Nations peace-keeping operations. In our opinion it is regrettable that this aspect of United Nations activity has become so controversial and that at this moment no agreement on the peace-keeping function of the United Nations appears possible. I should like to stress in this respect that Austria continued to support the concept of such operations carried out by the world Organization, We hope that through continued negotiations a satisfactory and generally acceptable solution to this problem will be found.
58. The complex and difficult problems characterizing the situation in the southern part of Africa have found no solution over the past year. It seems, on the contrary, that the positions of all the parties involved have become more inflexible than ever, and our hopes for a relaxation of the tension existing in the area in the foreseeable future are, therefore, only slight. Understandably, there is disappointment and bitterness among the Members of this Organization that so many resolutions of the General Assembly dealing with the urgent problems of apartheid. South West Africa and Southern Rhodesia remain unheeded. We deplore this situation, which is of deep concern not only to the countries of Africa but to all nations of the world.
59. I should like to reiterate, on this occasion, my Government's rejection of all forms of racial discrimination, including the concept of apartheid, and our firm support for the full implementation of the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights.
60. As to the situation in Rhodesia, it is known to this Assembly that Austria has refused to recognize the unilateral declaration of independence by the present régime in that country, and is observing strictly the sanctions imposed against that régime by the Security Council [resolution 232 (1966)]. We regret, however, that the decision of the Security Council has not been fully implemented. It is obvious that without the full co-operation of all States, the purpose of the United Nations cannot be achieved.
61. With regard to the situation in Southwest Africa, Austria supported resolution 2145 (XXI), adopted by the General Assembly last year. We regret that the Ad Hoc Committee for South West Africa was unable to agree on practical means of implementing that resolution. It is to be hoped that the Assembly will now consider other approaches to this question. As was suggested by a number of delegations, the appointment of a representative of the Secretary-General with the purpose of undertaking preliminary consultations on the spot might be helpful in this respect.
62. The fact that over the past years so little has been achieved in ensuring observance of the principles of the Charter and of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights in many parts of the world and that countless resolutions and appeals of the United Nations have been disregarded by the Governments concerned is, of course, a source of bitter disappointment.
63. Tension and antagonism between the races constitute one of the great dangers in our world today. Great efforts will still be required to eradicate the ideas of racial discrimination from the minds of all people, and in particular the younger generation. To this end, I am convinced, the debates in the United Nations and the resolutions adopted by the various organs of the United Nations, as well as our efforts in the field of education and information, will significantly contribute.
64. At a time when the Assembly is alarmed by so many conflicts in various parts of the world, we note with some satisfaction the relatively encouraging developments in Central Europe. Over the past years Austria has been able to maintain and reinforce its close and cordial relations with its traditional friends in the area, but it has also been possible to establish increasingly friendly relations with its neighbours adhering to different social and political systems. It is the desire of the Austrian Government to strengthen these ties further, and we hope that our efforts will be met with a corresponding spirit of co-operation from all quarters and with the wish to avoid all incidents that might harm this development.
65. While we express our satisfaction at this encouraging trend towards greater political stability in Central Europe, we must note with regret that the German problem has still not found a solution. Complete stability in Europe will, indeed, be impossible as long as this question has not been settled.
66. It is my duty to report now to the General Assembly on the efforts undertaken during the past year to solve the dispute between Austria and Italy regarding the implementation of the Paris agreement of 5 September 1946 concerning the South Tyrol.
67. Following the consideration of the question of South Tyrol at the fifteenth session of the General Assembly in 1960 and at the sixteenth session in 1961, this subject has been taken up at every subsequent session as a special item in the statements made by the Foreign Minister of Austria in the general debate. These statements contained a review of developments during the year with a view to informing the General Assembly of the progress achieved towards the desired settlement of the dispute.
68. The dispute, it will be noted, relates to the implementation of the Paris agreement of 5 September 1946 on South Tyrol, which was incorporated as annex IV into the Treaty of Peace with Italy of 10 February 1947. The agreement contains special provisions to safeguard the ethnical character and the cultural and economic development of the German speaking element of the population, including the exercise of a regional autonomous legislative and executive power. The issue is the fate of a quarter of a million people whose right to preserve their ethnic identity, within a nation of about 50 million inhabitants, has been assured them.
69. Referring to the fact that dispute had arisen between Austria and Italy concerning the implementation of the above-mentioned agreement, and desirous of preventing the situation created by this dispute from impairing the friendly relations between the two countries, the General Assembly, in resolution 1497 (XV) of 31 October 1960, urged the two parties concerned to resume negotiations with a view to finding a solution for all differences relating to the Implementation of the Paris agreement.
70. In resolution 1661 (XVI) of 28 November 1961, the General Assembly called for further efforts by the two parties concerned to find a solution in accordance with the above-mentioned resolution 1497 (XV).
71. In keeping with the provisions and the principles of the Charter and in full compliance with the General Assembly resolutions referred to above, Austria has spared no effort in seeking a solution of the differences by means of bilateral negotiations, as urged by the Assembly, Convinced that there must be a way to settle the conflict through direct negotiations, the Austrian Government has displayed, during the six years which have elapsed since the adoption of the last resolution at the sixteenth session of the General Assembly, the utmost calm, patience and readiness to compromise. In the light of the repeated assurances of goodwill given by our counterparts in the negotiations, in my speech here last year I was in a position to express confidence that the other side, too, would do all it could to overcome the remaining difficulties and that, in these circumstances, there was hope that an end would soon be put to the still unsettled differences.
72. Although another year has passed without the dispute's having been resolved, I am nevertheless of the opinion that developments since our last session contain important elements that have brought us closer to solving the remaining differences, in keeping with the injunction contained in General Assembly resolution 1497 (XV). A full year of negotiations between Austrian and Italian representatives has resulted in the elaboration of a series of measures, designed to create effective self-administration for the minority, which seems to be an appropriate basis for resolving the dispute.
73. We are, however, still confronted with the task of assuring the effectiveness of the envisaged measures within the framework of the Paris agreement of 5 September 1946. This is a procedural problem, namely, to establish appropriate modalities for the settlement in order to assure both Governments and the ethnic groups concerned that the agreement of 5 September 1946 will be implemented in the manner provided for in the above-mentioned system. The attainment of such safeguards presupposes goodwill on the part of all concerned in loyally fulfilling their obligations. In the substantive result described above, I see an encouraging sign for future consideration of the procedural aspects, a sign which strengthens my conviction that the present difficulties will be overcome. Indeed, no one could afford the risk of endangering the substantive results for the sake of procedural considerations; nor can any party to the dispute overlook the fact that the settlement of all differences concerning the implementation of the Paris agreement, in accordance with resolution 1497 (XV), can be achieved only on the basis of mutual trust and understanding.
74. One should not conceal the fact that the still unresolved dispute concerning the implementation of the Paris agreement could bring about the very situation which the General Assembly endeavoured to prevent by its resolution 1497 (XV), in which it recommended to both the countries concerned that they should refrain from any action which might impair their friendly relations — a recommendation which the Austrian Government has followed to the letter in word and deed.
75. Unfortunately, the negotiations are at present adversely affected by recent measures which are not connected with the dispute in question. We hope to see re-established very soon an atmosphere of objectivity, which is an indispensable condition for a successful conclusion of the negotiations.
76. Despite all difficulties, the Austrian Government is still convinced that, in accordance with paragraph 1 of the above-mentioned resolution, a settlement of the dispute should be reached through bilateral negotiations. We have given evidence of this conviction in about twenty-five bilateral meetings, among them nine on the Foreign Ministerial level. In this connexion, I should like to reiterate what I have already stated, last year, before this Assembly; the Austrian Government firmly condemns any act of terrorism, because violence is no way to settle international issues.
77. Resolving the conflict would not only enhance the mutual relationship of two neighbouring States with a common European cultural heritage and numerous economic ties, but would also deepen confidence in the efficacy of the principles of our Organization. The latter could, with full justification, consider the settlement of this conflict as a significant contribution to the maintenance of peace.
78. I wish to take this opportunity to convey, on behalf of my country, our gratitude to the General Assembly for the concern it has shown and the part it has played in the endeavours to achieve a solution of the present conflict.
79. I should now like to turn to the field of disarmament. We appreciate the efforts made over the past year by the countries participating in the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament. As we have regretfully come to realize that our hopes for an agreement on general and complete disarmament will not be fulfilled in the foreseeable future, it has become all the more important to concentrate on partial measures of disarmament in those areas where agreement can be reached.
80. In this respect we have been able to record some progress in the past years. Following the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and the partial nuclear test ban treaty of 1963, agreement was possible, last year, on a Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, which provides important measures limiting the armaments race in outer space. This Treaty was followed, in February of this year, by the signing of a Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, creating a nuclear-free zone in a large part of the world and also establishing an effective system of international control. These encouraging events were followed, in August of this year, by the tabling, at Geneva, of a draft treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The tabling of this draft treaty has been considered an event of great significance, and the Austrian Government shares this opinion. Ever since the end of the Second World War the world has watched with growing concern as the nuclear potential, and with it the means of destruction, increased. Numerous initiatives have been undertaken in the course of these twenty years to stop or limit the spread of nuclear weapons. Several of these initiatives within the General Assembly were supported by the Austrian delegation. Unfortunately, all efforts have hitherto failed. The stockpiles of nuclear weapons have been continuously growing and the number of countries possessing them has increased.
81. Now, for the first time, the possibility of stopping this dangerous evolution seems to be within reach. We sincerely hope that it will be possible to reach agreement on those points which the draft treaty has so far left open, particularly the question of effective international control. The fact that the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America has relied on the International Atomic Energy Agency's Safeguards System might perhaps serve as a useful precedent.
82. We expect that the treaty will be envisaged as a concrete step not only towards the limitation of nuclear armaments but also as a step towards nuclear disarmament. It objective should not be to create a nuclear monopoly of a few Powers, but rather to be a real beginning for the reduction and ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons.
83. We also understand the preoccupations expressed by a number of non-nuclear-weapon States that the treaty should not limit the peaceful uses and applications of atomic energy and their concern that their national security be assured if, under the treaty, they renounce the right to acquire nuclear weapons themselves. It is our hope that it will be possible to satisfy those considerations and thus ensure acceptance of the treaty by all nations. We appeal to all countries to realize the opportunity offered by the draft treaty, an opportunity which, if missed now, may perhaps not present itself again. The importance of an agreement today might reveal itself in its true perspective only in historic retrospect.
84. The presentation of the draft treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons is also a symbol of a certain relaxation of tension in East-West relations. In many fields the positive influence of this development has already been felt. One of these is the exploration and the peaceful uses of outer space where, over the past year, we have been able to record further progress in national and co-operative international space programmes, new technical achievements and further advances in the practical applications of space technology. The exploration and use of outer space is today no longer the prerogative of only a few space Powers, and the application of space technology is playing an increasingly important part in everyday life. Next year my Government will be privileged to be host to the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space [resolution 2250 (S-V)] whose primary objective will be to bring to all countries, and in particular the non-space and developing countries, the knowledge of the benefits which all nations will be able to derive from the practical applications of space technology. I can assure the Assembly that the Austrian Government will do everything in its power to contribute to the success of the Conference.
85. In addition to the Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Austria will, during 1968, act also as host to several other United Nations conferences, for example, the International Conference for the Revision of the Convention on Road Traffic and the Protocol on Road Signs and Signals, the annual meeting of the Industrial Development Board and — if the General Assembly concurs in the acceptance of our invitation expressed by the Secretary-General — also the international conference of plenipotentiaries on the law of treaties. Austria is proud to provide its capital city as a meeting place for so many important international gatherings and accepts this honour as a renewed recognition of the role which a permanently neutral State with a keen interest in the United Nations and its activities can play in this regard.
86. This leads me to a related question, namely, the establishment of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization at Vienna. During last year's Assembly session I had the privilege of proposing Vienna as a possible site for the headquarters of that Organization. May I today express Austria's sincere appreciation for the overwhelming acceptance this offer has found among the delegations of this Assembly. My Government made a special effort to Justify the confidence placed in it by the Assembly’s decision, and it gives me great satisfaction to say that our offer has already been accepted by the Industrial Development Board. Besides providing free of charge all the facilities required for the immediate establishment of the Organization at Vienna on a provisional basis, my Government decided to construct, at its own expense, a completely new United Nations centre in that city. This centre will comprise headquarters buildings for the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the International Atomic Energy Agency, in accordance with an agreement with the Board of Governors of the Agency, as well as an international conference centre, which would be at the disposal of those two Organizations and would be spacious enough for large-scale international conferences. The construction of this complex will require an investment of about $35 million, and the location of the site on the shore of the River Danube will provide ample opportunities for future expansion.
87. Since the headquarters agreement relating to the United Nations Industrial Development Organization entered into force in July of this year, Its Secretariat has already been established and Is actually working at Vienna. We trust that this Organization will be able to fulfil the urgent need to stimulate the industrialization of the less-developed countries and contribute to the great goal of development to which the United Nations rightly devotes so much of its attention and efforts.
88. My country stands ready to help wherever it can to improve the economic basis which is so important to the well-being and political independence of the countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America and, in particular, to increase trade relations with all countries of the world. We realize that after the successful completion of the Kennedy Round of tariff negotiations, which should result in a general increase in world trade, much remains to be done to improve the trading position of the developing countries. We therefore attach great importance to the forthcoming second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for which, to our satisfaction, a solid basis has been laid during the fifth session of the Trade and Development Board.
89. Thanks to the United Nations the world community today is fully aware of the serious problems facing the less-developed countries in their economic development. Special measures concerning economic development in favour of the least-developed nations seem to be called for, and we therefore fully support proposals like the one made by the Foreign Minister of Sweden only a few days ago. In view of the steadily increasing number of requests for assistance addressed to United Nations technical assistance bodies, my Government nearly doubled its contribution to the United Nations Development Programme during the last couple of years and will continue to increase its support in the future.
90. I have tried in my statement to deal with the main problems our world is confronted with today. We are of course aware that there are many other questions which are waiting for answers and solutions. However, it cannot be the purpose of this debate to cover all the manifold problems within and outside our agenda.
91. Let us not blame the United Nations for the failures of the past. Let us be more aware that it is up to us, the Member States, to make every effort in order to overcome the present impasse. If we succeed in eliminating the existing mistrust and if we succeed in creating more confidence among the nations of the world, the United Nations will surely be able to fulfil its great task, which is the maintenance of peace and security for mankind.
92. I should like to express the hope that this Assembly, guided by a spirit of co-operation, will be able to conclude this session successfully, and make constructive contributions towards a settlement of the many problems on its agenda.