206. At the outset, my delegation would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election as President of the twenty- second session of the General Assembly. You are following a distinguished line of predecessors. Your immediate predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Pazhwak of Afghanistan, carried a very heavy burden with distinction during the twenty-first session of the Assembly and the special sessions on South West Africa and the Middle East. The whole international community is indebted to him for his service. My delegation wishes to express the hope that you will be more fortunate in the burdens you will have to carry during this session. We have no doubt that you will discharge the duties of your high office with the same dignity, impartiality and wisdom that we have come to expect from Presidents of this august Assembly.
207. The agenda of the twenty-second session of the General Assembly shows that the Assembly will be confronted, as usual, with a wide variety of subjects of great importance for the welfare of mankind and the maintenance of international peace and security. Some of these subjects have appeared again and again on the agenda of the General Assembly, and this demonstrates that the task confronting the nations of the world is a continuing one, with difficulties and obstacles that cannot readily be overcome. We must continue to wrestle with these problems in the hope that in the course of time solutions will be found and measures adopted which will enable us to fulfil more adequately the aims and objectives of the United Nations Charter.
208. I should like to refer briefly to some of these topics.
209. As a newly independent State, Botswana is naturally interested in the granting of independence to those countries and peoples that still remain under colonial rule in one form or another. Coming as we do from Africa, we deplore the fact that there still are a number of peoples and Territories in our continent that have not yet achieved self-determination and independence, and we would urge those Powers which continue to hold millions of people in subjection to give serious consideration to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. This refers particularly to Territories such as Rhodesia, South West Africa, the Territories under Portuguese domination, and to all other Territories under colonial domination.
210. The Government of Botswana has recently participated in the United Nations International Seminar on Apartheid, Racial Discrimination and Colonialism in Southern Africa. It did so because it is convinced that these evils should be rooted out from that part of the continent to which we belong and in which we are endeavouring to develop a society free from racial discrimination. The Government of Botswana will support all practical and reasonable measures designed to achieve freedom from racial discrimination and from the domination of one group by another in any part of the world.
211. It will be recalled that during the twenty-first session a resolution was adopted terminating the Mandate of South Africa over South West Africa and deciding that the United Nations should assume responsibility for the administration of that Territory. At the fifth special session, it was decided to establish a United Nations Council for South West Africa to discharge this responsibility on behalf of the United Nations. We in Botswana are, however, uneasy about the impracticability of attempting to do anything in respect of South West Africa except in consultation with South Africa, which, de facto, administers the Territory. It is realized that the Republic of South Africa is at present unwilling to take part in such consultation, and we can only hope for an early, change in this attitude. Furthermore, it is our hope that South Africa will not take any unilateral step to alter the international status of that Territory.
212. I will not at this stage expand at too great length on what will probably be the subject of separate discussion later, I would, however, like to say generally, in respect of Rhodesia, that the position of Botswana is what it always has been, and that is that Botswana strongly condemns the unlawful declaration of independence by the Rhodesian Front Government, and hopes for an early negotiated settlement which will restore a lawful government in which, after a relatively short period, the majority of people in Rhodesia will rule their own country on the basis of representation by an elected majority.
213. It will be recalled that limited mandatory sanctions were adopted against Rhodesia last year. It seems clear, however, that these sanctions have not brought about the desired results, and the whole question will have to be examined afresh to see what further measures should be adopted, especially by the United Kingdom Government.
214. So far as the Middle East dispute is concerned, there has been no substantial alteration in the Botswana viewpoint. Cur belief, first, in the territorial integrity and political independence of all States in the Middle East, including Israel; second, in a termination of the state of belligerency; third, in a serious effort to solve the growing refugee problem in the Middle East; fourth, in free passage through international waterways; and fifth, a peaceful solution of the problem of Jerusalem, is unchanged.
215. All these questions require to be dealt with as a matter of urgency before another eruption breaks out in the Middle East. Botswana hopes very much that reasonable attitudes will prevail among all the antagonists which will make it possible for them to meet round the conference table and to work for a just, peaceful and lasting settlement which will be acceptable to and supported by the international community.
216. In respect of the Viet-Nam war, Botswana deplores the savage and wholesale destruction of life and property, the misery of the continual wounding and maiming of innocent people, the impossibility of social and economic development and of the raising of living standards for all because of the devastating war. It is, here again, most earnestly hoped that the two sides can be brought at an early date to the conference table and that the dispute can be settled peacefully and honourably. The international community as represented by the United Nations is anxious to have this war brought to a peaceful and honourable end, and my delegation will support all measures intended to bring the parties in the dispute to the conference table and to allow the people of Viet-Nam to exercise the right of self-determination and to resume normal peace-time activities.
217. The question of the representation of China in the United Nations will no doubt again be considered by the General Assembly, This question is complicated by the fact that there are two States which claim to be China. In this connexion, my delegation would like to reiterate its previous stand. Ambassador Matthews said last year:
"My delegation finds itself unable to approve of the idea of doing justice to one group by doing injustice to another. We are probably all agreed that we should like to see only one China in the Assembly, but the question is whether it is the business of this Organization to seek to impose an artificial unity upon the Chinese people.
"The question of the unity of China is one for the Chinese people to solve. All we are entitled to say is that we are prepared to welcome to the United Nations all the people of China and to express the hope that they will find ways and means of coming to this Organization as a united people. But if, for the time being, they come as two Chinas, my delegation feels that we should accept them as such and do all we can to encourage them to resolve their difficulties, but not seek to impose a false unity upon them. Both Chinas, it would appear, claim to be working for the ultimate emergence of a single, united nation, but that day is not yet. In the meantime, we must recognize the realities of the situation as It is today.
"My Government is in favour of the admission of Communist China to the United Nations, but it is unequivocally opposed to the expulsion of the Republic of China." [1481st meeting, paras. 31-33.]
218. The delegation of Botswana is prepared to support all measures and efforts directed towards the reduction of armaments among nations to a level consistent with the requirements of self-defence. The armaments race in any part of the world is not only a crushing burden upon the country or countries involved but represents a constant threat to all, in that war may at any time engulf the whole world.219. As a peace-loving nation, Botswana subscribes to the principle that war should be outlawed as an instrument for the settlement of international disputes. Botswana recognizes the right of every nation to defend itself against armed attack and that no nation should be allowed to benefit from its aggression. Aggression must be interpreted broadly to include the threat or the use of force to bring about change, Botswana will support all measures calculated to decrease tension between nations and to promote the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and the maintenance of peace and security. Peace is indivisible and therefore the maintenance of peace and security in all parts of the world is a matter of great concern to Botswana. 
220. My delegation recognizes the danger to mankind represented by the possession of nuclear weapons, the necessity to limit the number of nations in possession of nuclear weapons and the need for the protection of those nations which do not possess nuclear weapons, and it will therefore support all measures intended to promote international agreement on the use of nuclear power for peaceful purposes.
221. Botswana is already a signatory to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. In terms of this Treaty [Article IX], signatories to the Treaty undertake to be guided in their activities in this connexion by the principle of cooperation and mutual assistance, with due regard to the corresponding interests of all other States Parties to the Treaty.
222. I feel that it is necessary to add a few words on what is, in the minds of many, a major issue, and that is the relationship of States outside the Republic of South Africa with the people and Government of that country, and particularly the relationship of Botswana. You, Mr. President, and representatives are aware of the establishment of Botswana as a non-racial State in which all races can live in amity and self-respect, with equal opportunities for advancement. We are determined to succeed in this ideal, which we believe is becoming a reality. Indeed, it is our great pride that we feel that we have already gone a long way towards success, and it is gladdening that already several people of other races have become citizens of what is a predominantly black State.
223. We judge other countries by the standards which we have set up for ourselves and to the extent that the stand of South Africa on racial questions differs from ours, to that extent do we regret the South African attitudes. We cannot agree to the principle of separate development; we believe that all races can advance together to prosperity and happiness as one community, given the right conditions of education, standards of living and opportunity.
224. It has recently been reported that the Republic of South Africa is contemplating establishing diplomatic relations with African States on a basis of equality. Provided that such diplomats are accorded complete non-racial equality of treatment, that would be a step in the right direction, demonstrating that the barriers of race can with goodwill be removed. We think that South Africa cannot exist indefinitely in the African continent without African or black friendship, in the same way as we are convinced that the other States of Africa could profit from South Africa's friendship and benefit from its developed skills, expertise and know-how.
225. As I have said before, we should be able to move forward to prosperity together. South Africa, as the most highly developed State in Africa, is, we understand, prepared to offer technical assistance and aid to other States in Africa. Naturally, aid offered by South Africa will, like aid from any other country, be scrutinized very carefully for any strings that may be attached and will only be accepted if there are none. 226. In connexion with the situation in southern Africa, I wish to refer to a serious problem which has recently arisen in my country. Freedom fighters, originally from South Africa, returning from countries further north and desiring to re-enter South Africa to continue their struggle for freedom, have been engaged in military activities with Rhodesian security forces, and when hard pressed have retreated into Botswana, where my Government has been compelled, in according with our laws, to arrest them and to disarm them. Not only does this represent a serious security problem as far as Botswana is concerned, but it involves my country in economic and other difficulties with which it has to cope.
227. The international community cannot continue to overlook the seriousness of this situation, which may develop into something much more dangerous for the whole of southern Africa.
228. We can but hope and pray that the day is not too far distant when South Africa will change its present policies and fall into line with other nations in upholding fundamental human rights and freedom for all.
229. It will be futile if, in its desire to improve its relations with other African States, the South African Government does not take positive steps to remove the social, economic and political disabilities now suffered by its indigenous peoples. We would wish to see the Government of South Africa genuinely and unreservedly restore the natural rights and liberties of the non-Whites of that country. How proud would we be to see the day when we would have amongst us In this august Assembly a South African delegation which was truly representative of the cross-section of the population of South Africa. Botswana holds the view that South Africans of every colour or creed have a stake in their country and that all must share equally in the wealth and other gifts of nature with which it is so richly endowed.
230. In conclusion, I should like to say a few words on the matter of development. It may be thought that, because Botswana is a poor country, what 1 say concerns Botswana alone. This, however, is not the case. I plead on behalf of all developing nations and peoples. This century — and this applies particularly to the years since the Second World War — has seen unprecedented progress made in the achievement of self-determination and independence throughout the world by the developing peoples. Some peoples have achieved independence through the miseries of forceful rebellion against the former colonial Powers, but much has been achieved by and with the willing consent of those Powers. For this there is great reason for many millions of people to be happily thankful.
231. At the risk of stating the obvious, 1 should like to point out that in very many instances independence is somewhat of a mockery. Political independence — the ability to look the other man in the eye as an equal — is a splendid thing. It has been gladly welcomed and is most heartily appreciated. Pride may sustain an empty stomach, but the wearing of a loin-cloth when the other man is well fed and clad in elegant robes Is not enough in the long run.
232. Eventually, standards of living throughout the world must be raised to a point where political independence is matched by really viable economic independence, We are willing to use our maximum effort and personal endeavours to this end, in increasing measure as we overcome tribalism, sectionalism and other obstacles which frustrate us. But, except for a few lucky countries with natural wealth, we cannot do this without assistance. We look to the developed countries of the world, while they are endeavouring to raise their own standards, to do as much for us. Those of us who at present benefit from aid generously given are most truly appreciative of what has been done. But it is not enough that the burden of aid to developing countries should be carried by only a few countries in the world.
233. There will never be peace, nor prosperity, nor stability in this world until the wide discrepancy between the "haves" of the developed world and the "have-nots" of the developing world has been narrowed. In the same way as the devastated countries of Europe were assisted after the Second World War, developing countries can be helped until they can stand on their own, If only in their own interests of peace and security and their own peaceful further development, it seems vitally necessary that the more fortunate, wealthy developed Powers should ensure that the world in which they live should contain no soil in which the seeds of bitterness, frustration and disappointment can be sown. I would say that it would be most far-sighted and in the best interests of all the peoples of the world if those Powers' own development were slowed down if only to that little extent which would enable the developing countries not only to stand on their own feet but indeed to assist them in their own further progress.