82. Mr. President, on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation permit me to congratulate you on your election as President of the twenty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. We are pleased to note that for the first time in the history of our Organization, this distinguished and responsible office is finally being held by a representative of a socialist country. We hope that under your guidance this session will meet the expectations and aspirations of the peoples of the whole world and will achieve significant progress in solving the problems of strengthening peace, security and the development of international co-operation in all its forms.
83. At the same time, 1 should like to avail myself of this opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Pazhwak, the representative of Afghanistan, who successfully discharged the duties of the President during the difficult past term.
84. The General Assembly convenes in a situation marked by serious deterioration in international relations. In various parts of the world, we see the overt and unrestrained use of force, acts of aggression and armed intervention against nations that have chosen the path of independence and progress, and the systematic flouting of the generally recognized principles of international law and of the fundamental principles of the United Nations, by which relations among States and nations should be governed. Events in Viet-Nam, in the Middle East and elsewhere attest to the fact that these are not isolated phenomena but ever more conspicuous manifestations of a policy of force on a global scale and of imperialist desires to apply the law of the jungle to international relations in the struggle against fundamental progressive tendencies.
85. The growing aggressiveness of imperialism is giving rise to deep concern among the peoples. At the same time, however, it is increasing the peoples' determination to establish such relations among States as will guarantee security, freedom and peaceful development to all of them. The present situation likewise requires that the United Nations should consistently follow the goals and apply principles which it has set itself, and act resolutely against the policies of oppression and force. The manifestations of arbitrary imperialist activities must be brought to an end; and, with that goal in mind, the progressive and peaceful forces must unite for peace and social justice under the banner of the struggle against war.
86. The Great October Socialist Revolution, whose fiftieth anniversary we are marking this year, has become the symbol of the struggle to build a new and happy world. The historic achievement of the Great October Socialist Revolution, its ideas of social justice and of peace and friendship among nations and its policy or peaceful coexistence with respect for the equality and independence of nations are gaining ever more sympathy and support. The victorious fifty-year march of the ideas of that Great October prove the futility of reactionary efforts to reverse the progressive development of our world. The Czechoslovak people, in whose struggle for freedom the Great October Socialist Revolution played an enormous role, will celebrate that greatest event in the history of mankind in a manner worthy of it.
87. The gravest manifestation of the flagrant and brutal use of force in present-day international relations is the continuing war of the United States of America against the Viel-Namese people. This flagrant aggression by one of the Powers which, as a permanent member of the Security Council, bears a particularly great international responsibility, constitutes a serious threat to peace and security not only in South-East Asia but through the world.

88. The Government of the United States has thwarted the implementation of the 1954 Geneva Agreements since their very inception and has prevented the people of South Viet-Nam from freely exercising its right to self-determination. In an attempt to impose its will by force upon that people, the United States unleashed an aggressive war, in which It does not hesitate to use barbarous methods of warfare. Above all, the massive bombardment by the United States of the territory of a sovereign State, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, which is directed in an ever increasing degree against the densely populated areas of that country, is a mockery of all generally recognized norms of international relations.
89. The responsibility of the United States Government for the countless victims and sufferings of the Viet-Namese people, as well as for fanning the flames of war in a dangerous trouble spot which might lead to a world-wide military conflict, cannot be concealed by the declarations of the United States representatives on alleged intentions to end the war in South-East Asia. The true position of the United States is evidenced by its negative attitude toward the willingness displayed by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam to start talks with the United States following the cessation of bombing over the territory of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and of other aggressive acts by the United States against that country. The United States responded to that proposal, which was received with great approval by world public opinion at large, by constantly intensifying the bombing of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and increasing the numbers of United States troops and supplies of war material in South Viet-Nam. This is new proof that the Government of the United States is not interested in a peaceful settlement of the conflict. Nor can anyone be deceived by the farce of the recent elections in South Viet-Nam. That is why just indignation with and opposition to United States aggression is growing throughout the world, including the general public in the United States for that aggression is having an extremely injurious effect on the development of the international situation in general and is jeopardizing the possibility of finding solutions for a number of outstanding international issues.
90. The escalation of United States aggression in Viet-Nam increasingly threatens the security, integrity and sovereignty of other countries in South-East Asia which have embarked on a course of independent development. The Czechoslovak Government strongly condemns the violation of the sovereignty and neutrality of Cambodia and supports the Cambodian Government in its firm decision to safeguard the security of its territory and the inviolability of its frontiers. There must also be an immediate end to the aggressive actions of the United States against Laos, and there must be consistent respect for the 1962 Geneva Agreements on Laos.
91. The Czechoslovak people and their Government are lending and will continue to lend effective support and assistance to the fraternal Viet-Namese people in their heroic struggle against United States aggression. We are in complete sympathy with the just stands taken by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the National Liberation Front of South Viet-Nam, the only true representative of the South Viet-Namese people, on the solution of the situation in Viet-Nam. Those stands are in accordance with the 1954 Geneva Agreements and provide a real basis for a peaceful settlement. It is for the United States to take the first step towards and finally and unconditionally halting the bombing of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam instead of setting conditions and making appeals on all sides, such as those we have heard here, including appeals to our Organization which is not authorized to consider the solution. The fact that perhaps only the Government of the United States today opposes this reasonable demand attests to its isolation.
92. Indeed, the time has come for the United States to realize that it will not be able to bring the valiant Viet-Namese people to its knees and that it must withdraw from that country and respect the right of that country to decide its own future freely.
93. We are convinced that the just cause of the independence and sovereignty of the Viet-Namese people will triumph.
94. A continuing serious threat to world peace is the present situation in the Middle East, caused by Israel aggression and the continued occupation and exploitation of the captured territories of neighbouring Arab countries. That situation has already gone so far that the Israel representatives, who had tried to represent Israel as a peace-loving victim of its neighbours, now openly declare their intention to annex the occupied territories. The seizure of Jeruslaem, as well as the statement by the Prime Minister of Israel, Eshkol, on 6 September 1967, concerning the natural frontiers of Israel at the Suez Canal, give clear proof of Israel expansionist policies which imply the danger of a new outbreak of the conflict. The anti-humanitarian character of the aggressor has shown itself also in the treatment of the refugees from the West Bank of the River Jordan, most of whom were prevented from returning to their homes by the militarist ruling circles of Israel. The attitude of those circles towards United Nations General Assembly resolutions on Jerusalem [2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)] shows contempt for the United Nations, to which Israel owes its very existence.
95. These facts highlight all the significance of foreign support, without which Israel would not be able to commit aggression and exploit its results. The support given to the aggressor by the United States and certain other countries and here in the United Nations only proves that the Israeli aggression, as Jozef Lenárt, the Czechoslovak Prime Minister, stated from this rostrum: "was but one more link in the general policy of certain imperialist circles to increase tensions which led to the aggression by the United States of America against the Viet-Namese people and forcible interference in the internal affairs of States, especially in those parts of the world where the people use their right to self-determination and throw off the yoke of the old and new colonial domination". (1527th meeting, page 42).
96. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic considers It natural that all nations should have the right to independent existence. Under no circumstances can we accept the expansionist policy of the Israel ruling circles. For that reason we firmly take the side of the victims of aggression, in support of the just struggle of the Arab countries. We consider it essential that the aggressor, who has been condemned by world public opinion, should withdraw his armed forces from the occupied territories and make retribution for the damage he has caused. That is the only way to move forward on the road to peace for all States in the Middle East.
97. The Czechoslovak delegation is prepared to consider all realistic proposals and to co-operate with other delegations in finding an effective way of eliminating the consequences of the Israel aggression. In our opinion, that is also the aim of the initiative taken by the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as set forth In the message of President Tito, which has received the full support of the Czechoslovak Government. The United Nations must exert every effort and use every opportunity to ensure the achievement of a just peace and security in the Middle East.
98. The course of international events stresses the significance of efforts made by the peace-loving States which want the situation in Europe to he normalized. The safeguarding of peace and security in Europe is not just the narrow concern of European nations; it is in the interests of all peace-loving forces in the world because it would eliminate the threat that war might flare up again in Europe and, as in the past, spread to other continents.

99. This is the viewpoint from which Czechoslovak policy regards European questions. As President Novotny of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic recently stated:
"What we are striving for in Europe is also a contribution to and support for all nations of the world in their struggle for freedom and national sovereignty, against efforts to suppress by force their inalienable right to decide their national and social affairs."
100. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic consistently contributes to efforts to establish friendly relations among European nations, to eliminate the dangers of war, and to safeguard peace and the mutually advantageous co-operation of European countries. The common determination of the European Socialist States members of the Warsaw Treaty to attain these objectives was expressed in the Bucharest declaration of July 1966. That declaration contains a number of proposals for the gradual solution of problems which create a state of tension and unrest and threaten the peace in Europe. Another important step in this direction is the joint statement of the European Communist and Workers' Parties adopted at a Conference which took place at Karlovy Vary in Czechoslovakia in April 1967. The programme of action for safeguarding European security as contained in that declaration is meeting with positive response from the general public. The European nations are being shown ways to protect their vital interests. European policies must be based upon realistic considerations, combined with genuine efforts to achieve normal conditions. That goal can be reached only through unconditional respect for the situation established after the Second World War and in the post-war era.
101. In order to safeguard peace and security in Europe, all European States must make an effort to build up a dependable system of collective security which would replace the present division of Europe into military blocs and would create a firm basis for peaceful coexistence and co-operation among the countries of Europe. We welcome the fact that more contacts are being made and that consultations have been resumed on these questions between the Governments of European countries with different social systems, and we shall continue to support this trend. Together with other socialist States, we want a conference of all European countries to be convened in the near future to discuss security and co-operation in Europe.
102. However, this desirable trend in the development of European affairs is being seriously hampered by the policies of the United States in particular, which is maintaining hot beds of tension in Europe and trying to draw West European countries into its global great Power plans.
103. The attempts of militarist, revanchist and neo-Nazi circles in West Germany to bring about a change in the status quo in Europe are a dangerous source of conflict and area being supported by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. These forces do not wish to reconcile themselves to the boundaries which were justly established after the Second World War will not renounce their aim of changing conditions in Europe by force, and try to gain access to nuclear weapons in order to put their plans into effect. Although the Federal Republic of Germany is threatened by no one, it maintains at present the largest army with modern equipment in Western Europe. All this understandably gives rise to concern and tension in relations between European states, hampers the process of normalization and forces the peace-loving European nations to maintain the utmost vigilance.
104. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, a neighbour of both German States, has a vital interest in seeing that aggression, which twice in this century has led to the unleashing of a world conflagration, will never break out again on German territory. That is why we appreciate and support the peace- loving policy of the German Democratic Republic which, in the spirit of the Potsdam Agreements, has abandoned the heritage of German imperialism and has become an important factor of peace in Europe. This was proved last week by the proposal of the Government of the German Democratic Republic concerning the normalization of relations between the two German States, made in the letter of Prime Minister W. Stoph to the West German Chancellor Kiesinger. We have recently confirmed our friendly ties with the German Democratic Republic by a treaty of friendship, mutual assistance and cooperation.
105. We are also interested in establishing good-neighbour relations with the Federal Republic of Germany. We do not refuse to develop ties with the Federal Republic of Germany, in view of the level of development it has now reached. However, in the interests of the peace and security of the European nations and of the West German people themselves, the Federal Government must put an end to out-dated policies and respect the actual situation and the justified demands of the peoples of European countries and of the realistic elements in the Federal Republic of Germany. That means that it should give up its illegal claims to the exclusive representation of the whole of Germany in international relations, that it recognize the existence of the other sovereign German State, the German Democratic Republic, as well as the inviolability of the present frontiers in Europe, that it admit the invalid nature of the so-called Munich Agreement since its very inception and that it renounce all plans for the acquisition of nuclear weapons. Mere assurances of peaceful intentions and good will are not enough. The time has come to prove the sincerity of such declarations in practice.
106. The Czechoslovak delegation considers it to be an important fact that in the Eighteen-Nation Committee in Geneva identical draft treaties on the non- dissemination of nuclear weapons have finally been submitted by the Governments of the Soviet Union and the United States. We would point out that those drafts include a number of proposals submitted in the course of many years of negotiations and consultations among many States. In our view, the drafts respect the fundamental interest of all countries in safeguarding the effectiveness of the treaty and removing ail possibilities of disseminating nuclear weapons in any form.
107. The preparation of the treaty and its early adoption by the greatest possible number of States would constitute a major step towards the reduction of risks resulting from the existence of nuclear weapons. The treaty on non-dissemination would undoubtedly contribute also to the improvement of the international atmosphere and would give fresh impetus to negotiations on disarmament, particularly in view of the substantial diminution of the possibility of the outbreak of a nuclear war.
108. As early as 1961 the General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons [resolution 1653 (XVI)], in which it declared nuclear war to be a crime against mankind. That is why the Czechoslovak delegation listened with great interest and understanding to the proposal of the USSR delegation for the conclusion of a convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons (A/6834). The purpose of the USSR proposal is to carry out what had already been agreed on by the States Members of the United Nations six years ago.
109. The General Assembly should give its support to that proposal and promote the conclusion of a convention under which States would pledge themselves not to use nuclear weapons, not to threaten the use thereof and not to incite other States to do so. We agree that such a document, as mentioned in the Soviet proposal, should include an obligation that the signatory States will do everything in their power to conclude, as soon as possible, an agreement on the cessation of the production of nuclear weapons and the liquidation of all nuclear stockpiles.
110. The adoption of a solemn pledge by all Stales not to use nuclear weapons would he a significant step on the road towards the elimination from the world of the spectre of a nuclear war. The cessation of the production of nuclear weapons and the destruction of all its stockpiles, which should follow the adoption of the obligation on the non-use of nuclear weapons, would constitute complete nuclear disarmament and would become an historic milestone on the road towards general and complete disarmament.
111. The Czechoslovak delegation has studied the text of the draft convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons and wishes to express its full support for it. There can be no doubt that the adoption by the General Assembly of a resolution in support of the Soviet proposal would be one of the most useful achievements of the present session and that world public opinion would welcome the adoption of such a resolution with the utmost satisfaction.
112. One of the factors exerting a profound influence on the present era is the continuing disintegration of the world colonial system. However, events of the past year have shown that further efforts are needed if the generous ideas contained in the United Nations Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples are to be fully put into effect, There must be more resolute opposition to the colonial Powers that are suppressing by armed force the struggle of the peoples in the colonies for their freedom and independence. A serious obstacle to the liberation of those peoples lies also in the activities of the international monopolies in these colonies that exploit the natural and human resources there.
113. However, the fact that colonialism has been doomed by history to inevitable destruction must not weaken the anti-colonial struggle. The present session of the General Assembly should therefore examine the implementation of previously adopted resolutions and take measures to overcome the opposition offered and the obstacles erected by colonial and racist regimes on the way to completion of decolonization.
114. The alarming events in various parts of the world which I have mentioned offer a direct challenge to the principles of the Charter and of international law. The General Assembly must use all the means at its disposal to help to direct the development of the situation towards better results and to restore international legality, which has been violated by the arbitrary use of force in international relations, by intervention in the internal affairs of various States and nations, and by the suppression of national liberation movements of the peoples of colonial and dependent territories.
115. Therefore, if the United Nations is to accomplish its task, it must concentrate on finding means that will help to tie the hands of the violators of peace. Events in Viet-Nam and the Middle East have once again brought to the forefront of the attention of the General Assembly the urgent need to work out a definition of aggression. In spite of the untiring efforts made over a period of many years by the USSR and other socialist countries, it has so far proved impossible to fulfil that task. No wonder that it is precisely those who have present aggressions on their conscience who defend the view that this is not an appropriate time to consider that question.
116. The elaboration of a precise definition of aggression would, under present conditions, constitute one of the effective political and legal instruments for unmasking the aggressor, pillorying him and compelling him to comply with the valid principles of international law. That is why the Czechoslovak delegation welcomes the proposal submitted to the Assembly by Mr. Gromyko, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, on 22 September 1967, that an item entitled "Need for accelerating the definition of aggression in the light of the present international situation" (A/6833) should be included in the agenda of our session. We consider it right to set up a special committee which would submit a draft definition of aggression to the next session of the General Assembly.
117. In its foreign policy the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic bases itself on the principles of peaceful coexistence among States with different social systems. However, that by no means signifies that we should reconcile ourselves to the intrigues and aggressive nature of Imperialism. The principles of peaceful coexistence must be valid in relations among all States, without geographical restrictions and, as a consequence, also in the relations of large countries with small ones.
118. Resolution 1815 (XVII), adopted exactly five years ago, contained a provision that fundamental legal principles of peaceful coexistence should be studied with a view to their progressive development and codification, Even though some results have been achieved in the preparatory work on the draft declaration of those principles, the Special Committee on the codification of the principles of peaceful coexistence is still far from accomplishing its tasks. This is true, chiefly, of those parts of the declaration which concern the principle of the non-use of force and the principle of self-determination of peoples. The recently concluded session of the Committee in Geneva was unable, as the result of the opposition of certain Western States, to achieve progress in the codification of those two principles, despite the fact that the General Assembly had, at a previous session, adopted a resolution confirming the two principles of the Charter and urgently calling upon the States for strict compliance therewith.
119. The Czechoslovak delegation considers that the present session of the General Assembly should devote primary attention to the preparation of the declaration and to ensuring that the prohibition of the threat or use of force and the right of peoples to self- determination should receive full legal expression.
120. Member States are increasingly directing their efforts in the United Nations to assist in solving the complex problems of economic development and international economic co-operation.
121. In the forefront of our attention is the serious economic and social situation of the developing countries. Unfortunately, the gap between the economic and living standards of those States and the standards of the economically advanced countries has been continually widening. The responsibility for this situation rests above all with the former metropolitan countries which distorted the development of the economies of their former colonial territories. Along with the other capitalist countries, they are today using their political, military and economic power for the purposes of neo-colonialism, to keep many developing countries in the position of semi-dependent adjuncts supplying raw materials, and to perpetuate conditions of exploitation.
122. Socialist Czechoslovakia supports the just demands of the developing countries aimed at eliminating all manifestations of old and new colonialism. Our economic co-operation with these States is based on respect for the actual needs of those countries, helps to overcome the defects in their economies, and is founded on the principles of equality and mutual benefit. We also participate to the best of our ability in the main programmes of assistance to the developing countries.
123. Since the United Nations was founded, significant changes have taken place in the world and in the Organization itself. The membership of socialist and developing countries has widened and their weight in the solution of all problems has increased. However, the United Nations still does not consistently fulfil its duties under the Charter, and this fact greatly detracts from its authority.

124. The strengthening of the effectiveness of our Organization urgently requires that the United Nations should finally rid itself of all vestiges of the "cold war" period and that the time when this Organization was unilaterally governed by a single group of States should be relegated to the past once and for all.
125. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic holds the view, already set out in the Czechoslovak document of 26 November 1964 on strengthening the effectiveness of the United Nations, that "compromises between those who abide by strict observance of the Charter and those who adjust the Charter to their unilateral needs would be harmful primarily to the Organization itself". This applies particularly to the precise definition of the role of United Nations organs in safeguarding international peace and security. Instead of inventing unrealistic machinery beyond the scope of the Charter, we must concentrate on the utilization of all the possibilities provided for by the Charter. Only an approach of that kind will save the United Nations from difficulties, will lead to the creation of a sound basis for United Nations measures to safeguard international peace and security, and will exclude the possibility of their being misused against national liberation movements and the democratic and progressive forces in the world.
126. One of the constant sources of threats to peace and international security is to be found in the unsolved problems connected with the so-called Korean question. Czechoslovakia is among the States which proposed the inclusion in the agenda of the present session of the General Assembly of the item on the withdrawal of United States and other foreign military forces which occupy South Korea under the flag of the United Nations. (A/6696 and Add.1-3). The United States occupation of South Korea is the main obstacle to the unification of the country, which is the internal affair of the Korean people. The United Nations must see to it that the rights of the Korean people are fully exercised. This also implies the liquidation of the so-called United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, which has never had and does not have any justification whatsoever. That is why the Czechoslovak delegation hopes that the overwhelming majority of Member States will recognize the illegality and danger of the present situation and will express themselves in favour of the withdrawal of United States and other foreign military forces from South Korea and the dissolution of the so-called Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.
127. In view of the desirability of achieving the universality of this Organization, consideration should also be given to the request for admission to membership in the United Nations submitted by the German Democratic Republic. That State complies with all the conditions of membership stipulated by the Charter and we are therefore in favour of its admission at the earliest possible time. We have no objection to the admission at the same time of the other German State, the Federal Republic of Germany. The question of the representation of the Chinese people in the United Nations by its legitimate Government should also be considered and the Chiang Kai-shek clique, which does not represent anyone, should be removed.
128. The Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic considers the United Nations Organization and its Charter to be important instruments for the maintenance of peace and the strengthening of international security and a significant means for the promotion of universal co-operation among States and nations.
129. The Czechoslovak people is vitally interested in the elimination of the danger of war and in the consolidation of peace, which is an indispensable prerequisite for the successful completion of the building of an advanced socialist society. Acting upon the instructions of its Government, the Czechoslovak delegation will therefore do its utmost at this session to make the greatest possible contribution to the fulfilment of the Organization's main tasks and to the safeguarding of lasting world peace.
