38. My delegation wishes to offer the President the congratulations due to him on his election to preside over the work of this General Assembly, for we are encouraged by the hope that the work that awaits us on the proposed agenda will be carried out In the favourable atmosphere engendered by the goodwill of all of us who bear the grave responsibilities we assumed under the United Nations Charter. His election is a guarantee that this will be so, despite the magnitude of the task and the obstacles that will stand in the way of our efforts to find viable solutions to the problems on our agenda that will satisfy all the interests concerned and the aspirations that we all share.
39. Under your skilful direction we must hope that all the difficulties, disagreements and misunderstandings that may arise during this session that is just starting will be helped by the moderating spirit and the harmonious goodwill that prevailed at the birth of our Organization at San Francisco. The United Nations gained maturity after being subjected to the most cruel tests, which, far from having weakened its power as the chief instrument for saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war, have enabled it to rise afresh each time with the necessary vitality to safeguard and to proclaim with authority the pronouncements in the preamble and the guiding principles enshrined in the Charter.
40. At the last session of the General Assembly, the delegation of the Dominican Republic appeared for the first time as the genuine representatives of a democratic State ruled by a constitutional Government elected by universal suffrage, after the vicissitudes that the principles on which the Republic had been based in 1844 had suffered for many years.
41. The Government which I have the honour to represent at this rostrum not only bases its desires for justice and progress on the will of the people to survive and to work out an effective democracy on the lines of that defined in the Charter of Santiago de Chile, but also to give unlimited respect to the legal order of the United Nations and to the rights inherent in man, which are the guarantee of the human species.
42. At the end of a year of that profession of faith, my delegation is glad to affirm that today the Dominican Republic Is a State based on law and its democratic institutions are guaranteed by a Constitution that has satisfied the social, political and economic demands of the Dominican people, despite the economic and financial collapse from which the country was suffering when the constitutional period of Government started on 1 July 1966, as a result of a prolonged political crisis and the ravages of the civil war.
43. The progress made by the Dominican Republic during the constitutional period of Government under the leadership of Mr. Joaquin Balaguerhas fully justified the confidence of the people, who voted overwhelmingly in favour of it. Their vote confirmed the determination of the people to live under the protection of a democratic régime that was able to establish the rule of justice, internal public confidence and international prestige, after the disruption brought about by the serious events that had disturbed the institutional life of the Republic for years, when the armed and civil rebellions, facilitated by the previous armed conflict, had not yet been put down and the majority of the population had an alarming quantity of destructive weapons at their disposal and veritable arsenals were concealed in various parts of the country. It must be recognized that while, on the one hand, the task to be carried out called for a bloodless campaign for this type of disarmament, on the other hand there was a need for spiritual disarmament to overcome the danger and obstacles in the way of restoring to all minds the good sense and wisdom that had perished under the impetus of a state of disorder, pitilessly directed, that had taken possession of the will and patriotic sentiments that have been the outstanding characteristics of a people enamoured of freedom and independence.
44. At the present time the country has made great progress towards the reconciliation and pacification of the communities, profoundly divided by political rancour which a disrupted economy has made worse and worse, bringing the disorder to a state not unlike that of the disasters that shatter the normal life of peoples.
45. I would not be sincere in making this statement if I did not acknowledge that the country is still faced with some difficulties, which must be recognized as the remnants of the process of general disruption and of a real state of war with all the evils that such situations generate.
46. These difficulties naturally affect the Government's plans for the total restoration of the national economy and of the results that are to be expected of the finances of a progressive State, where the juridical and administrative authorities are doing their utmost to overcome one of the most disturbed periods in the history of the country.
47. In spite of these reservations, which I feel obliged to make, I must state here that the general Dominican situation already allows us to hope for the progressive recovery of all the factors that are essential for the restoration of the economic order and the rationalization of financial stability.
48. While we are still convalescing from many of the merciless evils that endangered democratic principles in the national territory, I can affirm that the necessary safeguards for the investment of national and foreign capital have been strengthened and public and private initiative has been encouraged by appropriate modern means, for the mobilization of all the productive forces of the country in order to rescue the copious natural resources that can stimulate those investments and the boundless wealth of possibilities that the country offers from the stagnation that had overtaken them. Thus we hope to overcome, in a short space of time, the inertia that has been the actual cause of the delay in making progress in a medium that is so propitious for the achievement of the techniques recommended to the less developed countries.
49. In order to give the development plans a more dynamic character, the public Administration has made a great effort to give undiscriminating assistance for the development of diversified agriculture; it has managed to inspire confidence in stock breeding activities, which could rise to much higher levels from which the producers could profit in foreign markets; it has improved the deficit situation of the sugar industry in the dependent zones of the State. In that last respect, the increase in the quota assigned to the Dominican Republic in the United States market, after negotiations which were welcomed in the competent official centres, offers new prospects, not only in regard to the economic yield Itself but also to the acquisition of the currency needed to give a more ambitious direction to the economic and financial system, whose scientific machinery is already operating, governed by the most advanced methods adapted to the modalities, possibilities and demands of the medium for which these instruments of economic progress in our time are designed.
50. In the Government's programmes, which cover all promising fields, electrification is also being considered as a means of ensuring the constant expansion of industry, better conditions of economic life through the reduction of unemployment to a minimum and better paid use of labour.
51. These programmes, which are now in full operation, include a considerable number of public works of every kind and provide for immediate and direct action by the Government to carry out the large-scale building activities that are needed to solve, as far as possible, the disturbing problem of housing.
52. The development plans, whose scope I need not enlarge upon in this sketch of the Dominican situation, are also designed to provide greater guarantees and facilities for trade expansion and, in particular, to secure foreign markets for the national products and to stimulate an immediate and rapid increase in those productive activities. It is for this reason that the Dominican Republic supports the principles and resolutions concerning Latin American economic integration, which culminated in the Meeting of American Chiefs of State at Punta del Este and, more recently, the session held at Asuncion, Paraguay, at the ministerial level, which was an essential step for the adoption of the Latin American common market within the prescribed time.
53. All these projects, some of which are already in operation, have been and will be possible in my delegation's country because of the Government's policy of arming all men with goodwill and initiative and freeing the minds of the people of the passions that have so deplorably divided the Dominican family. The Administration is indeed convinced that the destiny of the country depends on the pacification of consciences and the passage from revolution, in the way in which it was suffered by the people, to a true revolution of the people, consisting of progress and the uniting of all Dominicans to channel the immutable attributes of the Republic towards a new destiny of civilization and general well-being.
54. Lastly, I must acknowledge that the technical assistance we have received from the United Nations, the economic and technical assistance of the Organization of American States and the economic impetus that the Alliance for Progress has been providing through that organization, in accordance with the principles adopted at the Punta del Este meeting which gave rise to the Alliance, have been of great help in the efforts undertaken by the Dominican Government and people to lift the country out of the unfavourable situation into which it had sunk.
55. I thought it well, before speaking of the items on the agenda, to give a precise survey of the progress made by the Dominican Republic and I hope that in so doing I have confirmed the favourable predictions made by the Dominican delegation at the twenty-first session of the General Assembly. It gives my delegation great pleasure to express its gratitude for the honour that has been conferred on it in being chosen as one of the Vice-Presidents of this Assembly. This is undoubtedly a recognition of the efforts that my Government is making to reaffirm the principles of effective democracy and to comply with the rules established by the Charter, as well as reflecting proportional representation of the various geographical regions.
56. The Dominican Republic reaffirms the sacred and inalienable right of self-determination of peoples. This principle brought about the separation of our people from the metropolitan country and the appearance of the Republic in international life, influenced by the liberal ideas of the French revolution, the liberating ideals of Simon Bolivar and the declarations concerning determinant rights.
57. Armed with these firm convictions, we shall always support the immutable right of peoples to become free and independent States, wherever they may be and providing the desire for independence is an expression of the will of the dependent communities, whatever may be the size of the territory or the density of the population.
58. We believe that our status as a State constituted in exercise of the right of self-determination, to which all peoples are entitled, does not allow us to disregard this principle or to remain indifferent to any weakening of it by the governing Powers for reasons of self-interest or policy.
59. In 1961, during the sixteenth session of the General Assembly, the Dominican delegation maintained that, if denuclearization was indivisible, then it should be recognized that Latin America, as a region, had the right to adopt an individual denuclearization agreement. Scarcely five years later, this view was shared by nearly all the Latin American countries.
60. This proposal for the banning of nuclear weapons, which was designed in this part of the hemisphere for the countries which not only realize that it is impossible for them to produce weapons of this destructive nature but are reluctant to weaken their economy still further when there are such urgent demands for material, social, political and cultural development, produced the essentially wise result of bringing about a collective will opposed to the introduction of weapons of mass destruction in this part of the world, in conflict with the inequality of defence of the Powers involved in this matter.
61. As a result of this state of mind, on 14 February 1967 the Latin American countries signed in Mexico the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America [see A/6663], which had come about as a result of the various sessions which had preceded the drafting and signature of this instrument. The Dominican Government's decision to become a party to this important Treaty does not in anyway interfere with any agreements on this serious problem which the nuclear Powers may make among themselves.
62. In keeping with the position that we have adopted on the question of general and complete disarmament, my country will continue its efforts to bring about the favourable atmosphere which may lead to the adoption, through the United Nations, of an instrument giving effect to this noble aspiration.
63. In accordance with our consistent devotion to the natural principle of the self-determination of peoples, my delegation is inclined prima facie to think that, at the right time and place, the people of Korea should express their wishes through an electoral consultation, in a direct vote held on the basis of universal suffrage and guaranteed by the United Nations. For this purpose it would be necessary to prepare a consultation based on the functions that have been entrusted to the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.
64. My Government doubts whether, in the state of affairs which large regions subject to the principles of the Charter and to other advances of positive international law are experiencing, a step of such great implications could be taken in the near future. The problem calls for clear and precise replies to many unknown factors in order that the final decision on the subject, and its implementation, may not meet with other complications that might make it more difficult to put an end to a situation in which not only the Powers concerned but all States Members of the United Nations are interested.
65. Whatever decision is taken on this important item of the agenda will have to conform to the requirements of the legal and peaceful settlement of disputes. Whatever steps meets with general agreement, It will have to take into account all the previous happenings that led to the Korean situation, with the important participation of the Security Council in the circumstances with which we are all familiar. Whatever settlement is agreed upon, it will have to satisfy the need for effective and legitimate security measures calculated to maintain the status quo until such time as the final decisions are put into effect.
66. With regard to the policy of the Government of the Republic of South Africa, we have to admit that whatever proceedings may be contemplated must be in keeping with the declaration in paragraph 3 of Article 1 of the Charter, which lays down the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations: "To achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion". This Is clearly a provision that Member States are called upon to fulfil, although the subject of human rights has become a glaring reality as the cause of international tensions which are liable to unleash the scourge of war, a result which all States which are subject to the regime of the world Organization are in duty bound to avoid.
67. This situation is one of great delicacy which requires to be handled with the greatest circumspection, in view of the fact that the principles of the Charter oblige Member States to refrain from intervening in the domestic affairs of other States, even if those Members of the United Nations are subjects of international law which are not contractually bound to the United Nations.
68. On this matter my Government is of the opinion that, in view of the tensions to which we have referred, it would be wise not to prolong the sanctions which have been adopted beyond what is expedient and not to extend their field of application unduly. It is this thought that gives the Dominican Republic serious doubts with regard to Rhodesia and South West Africa.
69. I must explain that my Government regards these general considerations only as a basis for deductions which may meet with the approval of the States which are trying to find more perfect solutions.
70. The Dominican Republic intends to take part in the second session of UNCTAD, which is to be held at New Delhi from 1 February to 25 March 1968, taking a realistic view of our problems and with the desire to obtain the co-operation of the developed countries in confronting the delaying influence, a social evil which is just as complex as the evils of ignorance, destitution and poverty suffered by peoples. It is to be hoped that we shall have the same hope at New Delhi that we had at Geneva in 1964.
71. Since that last session, there have been as many obstacles to the progress of the under-developed countries as there were before. When it is possible to appraise the practical results achieved, it will become clear that very little progress has been made towards the achievement of the objectives set forth in the Geneva Final Act, In this connexion special mention should be made of the deterioration in the terms of trade brought about in the foreign trade of the countries which are struggling to achieve more satisfactory levels.

72. I do not think there is any need for me to repeat here that we must always recognize that the development of our countries depends essentially on their exports. This is a problem inherent in development not only as a vital necessity for the peoples but even more as an imperative requirement for survival. Thus the fall in the prices of many of our basic products to levels that are sometimes desperately low is a tragedy for us. Nevertheless, we feel that in this age of burning realities we must not foster illusions that might lead to acts of unforeseeable consequences.
73. The item concerning the world social situation is also of special interest to us. It is only by a thorough knowledge of the facts and of their different characteristics in the different regions that we can arrive at effective ways of finding specific and workable solutions in a field of such magnitude and such complexity. There is no denying that wars have their origin in the spirit of men and it is therefore in the spirit of men that the defences of peace must be conceived.
74. The majority of countries in the world are confronting a crisis which is not only political and economic but also, and very emphatically, a crisis of understanding. It is clear from history that misunderstanding among the countries of the world has been the cause of the suspicion and mistrust that have dragged nations into the disagreements and frictions that cause war. We therefore feel that the item should be discussed on the basis of all the particular points that are likely to generate social phenomena and to bring the peoples nearer to the road that leads to their well-being, which in the last resort is the road of peace.
75. We urge once again that the problem of Viet-Nam should be solved on the basis of agreements satisfying the opposing interests and we recognize that the precedent established by the peaceful and democratic elections in which the people of Viet-Nam had an opportunity to express their wishes freely through their votes is a sign that a legitimate right properly exercised can still meet the challenge of armed force. These results provide a fresh element on which to form the decision that must be taken on the request of the peace-loving peoples.
76. Lastly, we reiterate our confidence that the situation in the Middle East can be settled through negotiations which respect the procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
77. The blood of Quijote flows in the veins of all us Latin Americans to a greater or lesser degree, and for that reason we are always ready to break lances in honour of the great lady called freedom, for it is only she who will produce the peace for which we long. We must be attached to peace and international brotherhood if we wish to survive. Only through the widest co-operation among peoples, the sole means at our disposal, can we find a strong shield against the disasters of individual ambitions. Our voice is the voice of the small nation that calls upon the great nations to reflect, so that they may fulfil their great destiny and their great duty. The voice of the weak, armed with law and justice, can be stronger than the voice of the strong, armed with their own political interest. We do not like to see the great nations using their power to trample on the small, nor do we like to see various nations aligned for the destruction of other nations or for destruction among themselves, A pragmatic conception of life teaches us that political inequality inevitably accompanies the juridical equality of States.
78. These considerations bring to mind the unchanging Dominican thesis, faithfully and brilliantly expressed by Dr. Americo Lugo, our country's great orator and internationalist, at the Fourth American International Conference, held at Buenos Aires in 1910, for we have always pursued a great ideal, striving for it and ready to die for it if necessary. This great voice of a small nation at this big Conference was praised by Leopoldo Lugones, the eminent Argentine poet, who said: "'Whether or not it is the voice of the weak, it is the most honourable and the noblest that has been heard at this Conference". Dr. Americo Lugo, criticizing the lack of a great ideal in the programme, said: "The established nations which are prosperous and rich are looking for markets; but those that are not prosperous but are weak and poor are seeking peace, stability and freedom before markets. I do not believe in wealth" — he added — "but in virtue, ideals are more necessary than bread. To think one thing and to profess another dishonours diplomacy. Sincerity is the chastity of nations". Carlos Mascari called Lugo "the valiant defender of the American ideal".
79. Let us hold fast to these ideas and follow this path. As far as we Dominicans are concerned, that is our national and international line of conduct.