170. Mr. President, I have great pleasure in adding my own and the Gambian delegation's warm and sincere congratulations to the numerous well-earned tributes which you have drawn from so many other representatives on the occasion of your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly at its twenty-second session. Permit me to say that none has deserved this honour better than you, and it is a matter of deep satisfaction to my delegation that your well-known contributions to the advancement of peace as well as to the ideals of this Organization have today received the acknowledgement which is their due.
171. May I also be allowed to extend my congratulations to your immediate predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Pazhwak, for the masterly way in which he conducted the affairs of the General Assembly at its twenty-first session. It was not an easy session, but throughout the strains and tensions of a difficult period, Ambassador Pazhwak always performed his duties with wisdom, tact and impartiality, and thereby earned the eternal gratitude of this Organization.

172. The general debate in the autumn session of the General Assembly is traditionally a time for stocktaking and introspection. It also provides the occasion for those delegations which so desire to put to the Assembly their thoughts on and their formulas for the solution of international problems, I shall endeavour to state, as succinctly and as clearly as I can, my Government's position on certain issues with which we shall be concerned during this session.
173. In spite of the pessimistic note which was struck at the beginning of this session, and to a certain extent re-echoed in the Annual Report of the Secretary-General [A/6701], I should like to say that there is much in the way of positive achievement for which the twenty-first session could congratulate itself. There is a tendency to take our achievements and successes for granted and to emphasize and brood over our failures. If we are not to give way to despondency, it would be salutary to take our failures with our successes.
174. My Government is satisfied that the United Nations has achieved something in Cyprus and in Kashmir, and it is our fervent hope that this is but the beginning of what will be a lasting solution of the problems in those two areas.
175. The Gambia Government attaches due importance to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and therefore welcomes the latest steps taken in this general direction through the submission by the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of identical texts of a non-proliferation treaty. Further progress can now be envisaged towards general and complete disarmament with effective international control.
176. It is gratifying to note the growing co-operation among Member States in providing and exchanging information on outer space activities. We must now press ahead with the preparation of draft international agreements on assistance and with the formulation of international law for outer space.
177. South Africa continues to apply its inhuman and abhorrent policy of apartheid in defiance and utter disregard of world opinion. It is to be deplored that, contrary to the resolutions of the Security Council and of this Assembly, certain States continue to increase their investments in and their trade with South Africa. If the Vorster Government is to be forced to revise its policies of apartheid, it is imperative that all States co-operate in measures decided here, and particularly in the application of resolution 2054 (XX) of 15 December 1965, calling for sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter.
178. On the other side of the picture, I am sure we all note with satisfaction the increased assistance being given to the victims of repression in South Africa and the success of the training programme established by the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution 191 of 18 June 1964.
179. The failure, or rather the refusal, of the Portuguese Government to comply with previous Security Council and General Assembly resolutions calling for its recognition of the rights of the peoples under its administration to self-determination and independence, the acts of repression daily being committed against our brothers in Portuguese-dominated Territories and the numerous violations by Portuguese troops of the territorial integrity of independent African countries adjacent to Portuguese-held territory, constitute a serious and permanent threat to international peace and security. As in South Africa, this situation calls for energetic and concerted action under Chapter VII of the Charter. My Government has always co-operated in all measures applied in this regard.
180. The Gambia's position in regard to the Rhodesian problem is clear and constant. Whilst maintaining that it is the primary responsibility of the British Government to bring down the rebel regime of Ian Smith, to restore legality and to prepare the way for independence under majority rule, my Government has always held the view that the use of force must not be ruled out. We recognize, however, the difficulties and dangers which armed intervention in Rhodesia might pose, not only for Britain but more particularly also for Rhodesia's neighbours. The Gambia has loyally co-operated in the application of mandatory sanctions, but it is evident now that these have failed to achieve the desired effect. It is time that the British Government considered other means of ending the rebellion in Rhodesia, either on its own or by concerted action with the United Nations.
181. The admission of the People's Republic of China into the United Nations has been debated in this Assembly for many years now. We support those who feel that the People's Republic of China's record of aggression and interference in the domestic affairs of other States and its open flouting of the Charter and aims of the United Nations hardly qualify it for membership of this world body. But in the quest for world peace, the Gambia Government would not oppose the admission of the People's Republic of China, as it holds the view that there is enough room at the United Nations for the two Chinas. Nevertheless, we shall not support any resolution which calls for the admission of the People's Republic of China on. the one hand and the expulsion of the Republic of China on the other.
182. My Government is convinced that the Viet-Nam problem is one that does not lend itself to a military solution. Only a political solution can bring peace back to the unfortunate and long-suffering people of this troubled area. It is a matter for regret that so far all attempts to get the parties to the dispute to negotiate have failed. My Government feels that efforts should be pursued to bring the parties to the conference table.
183. In spite of all the efforts deployed by this Organization to prevent a confrontation, hostilities again broke out between Israel and the Arab countries on 5 June last. Although, as events proved, the United Nations was unable to prevent the confrontation, this Organization once again proved its usefulness by quickly bringing about a cease-fire. Both in the Security Council and in the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly it was not possible to devise a solution acceptable to both sides. My Government's stand on this problem is dictated by its respect for two principles enunciated and accepted by this Organization: the peaceful settlement of disputes and the recognition and protection of the sovereignty and independence of Member States. My delegation's concern during the difficult and protracted debate on this situation was to help arrive at a solution, both equitable and acceptable, which would restore peace and harmony in this part of the world. In the event, this was not to be, but my Government has not given up hope that in the end reason will prevail over emotion and that peace and security will come back to the peoples of the Middle East.
184. The United Nations Development Programme, which now combines the Special Fund and the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, continues to make a vital contribution towards improving the economies of the developing countries. The newly formed United Nations Industrial Development Organization also holds great promise for accelerated industrial development in the developing countries. The ever-widening gap between the rich and advanced nations on the one hand and the developing countries on the other, the deterioration in the terms of exchange and trade between these countries are matters which call for urgent examination and positive solutions at the instance of the world body. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development has a special duty here. My Government feels that the United Nations must encourage interest in the economic relations between the developed industrial nations and the developing primary production countries in the field of aid. At a time when the need for such aid is growing, it is saddening to note that the volume of assistance from donor countries is on the decline. The problem is made more serious by the fact that the primary production countries suffer from the effects of a continuous deterioration in the terms of trade.
185. It is evident from all this that this Organization is persevering — and to a great extent succeeding — in its efforts to make this planet of ours a better place to live in. Whilst the record could have been bettered, there is no denying that once again the prophets of doom have been proved wrong. This is not to say that there is cause for complacency. The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where foreign mercenaries are threatening the sovereignty of the country, and that in Nigeria, threatened by secession and disintegration, need to be meditated. There are lessons in these, I am sure, for all of us.
186. As regards Nigeria, although the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federation must be respected, and the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States recognized, my Government feels that the situation has reached a stage where the possibility of some form of international mediation should be explored.
187. The presence of foreign mercenaries on Congolese territory constitutes a threat and an affront to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All assistance should be given to the Government in Kinshasa to remove this threat.
188. I should like to say a few words about my country's foreign policy. Recognizing the importance of the individual State In the collective search for peace, the Government of the Gambia pursues a policy of non-alignment. To us this simply means freedom to decide on issues according to our conscience, without external influence. We strongly believe in African unity and its potentialities for the achievement of world peace. We also believe in regional co-operation. This has been amply demonstrated by the conclusion, in April of this year, of a Treaty of Association between my Government and the neighbouring Republic of Senegal. The Treaty, which provides for annual meetings of Heads of Government, and for the setting up of a permanent secretariat to service an Inter-State Ministerial Committee which will be the main organ of co-operation, is a testimony of the will of the people of Senegal and the Gambia to face their common problems together.
189. Besides living in peace and co-operating with its neighbours, my country will continue to support the United Nations. I must say, however, that effective support will depend on whether or not we shall be able to afford continued membership of this Organization. At the level at which the Gambia is assessed for contributions, this is, to say the least, doubtful. We have made repeated representations, not only to this Organization, but also to the Organization of African Unity and to various Commonwealth organizations, about the rates at which the Gambia is assessed for contributions to these organizations. We strongly feel that these scales and rates are based on data and criteria which do not take into account the circumstances of small unendowed countries like the Gambia. We question the equity of applying to the Gambia a minimum rate which was fixed for countries several times larger and richer. Our representations have met with some success in the Organization of African Unity and in the Commonwealth organizations of which we are members. I hope that they will be taken in good part here, thus enabling the Gambia to continue to play its part and to discharge its obligations in the comity of nations.
190. I cannot end this statement without paying a special tribute to our Secretary-General, U Thant, for the eminent services he has given and continues to give to this Organization and to the whole world by his dedication to the ideals of our Charter and his untiring efforts in the settlement of international disputes.
191. When my Prime Minister had the privilege of addressing this Assembly on the occasion of my country's admission to this Organization in 1965 [1332nd meeting], he remarked that the United Nations was yearly becoming a more potent force for the maintenance of world peace and suggested that everything should be done to maintain and further strengthen its efficacy as an instrument for the improvement of the lot of mankind. It was in that spirit that he pledged the Gambia's support for any cause which this Organization may decide to make its own and which aimed at furthering the uniqueness and the value of the individual In the common humanity of all peoples.
192. I reiterate here today my country's undiminished faith in the United Nations and all that it stands for, and I pledge anew the Gambia's unqualified support for and co-operation in the work of this great Organization.