1. Mr. President, the fact that your country is in south-eastern Europe and has already long-standing historical ties with Greece makes doubly gratifying my task of extending warm congratulations to you, both in my own stead and on behalf of the Greek delegation, on your unanimous election to the Presidency of this Assembly. Your many qualifications, your competence and your political perception, the depth of which we in Greece have had occasion to appreciate, are a guarantee for the orderly and efficient progress of the labours of this Assembly.
2. To Mr. Pazhwak, the outgoing President, I wish to express the Greek delegation's appreciation for the efficient and expeditious manner, and for the authority with which he has accomplished his task. Mr. Pazhwak, who presided over three sessions of the General Assembly, has won our esteem and admiration. We thank him and congratulate him on the services he has rendered our Assembly.
3. This is by no means the first time that we meet under extremely serious conditions. Two years ago, this Assembly was faced with another crisis which almost paralysed its work, though at that time it was a question of an organic evil, rather than of a crisis involving prestige and authority, such as is now the case.
4. In 1965, a formula was worked out under which agreement was reached which enabled us to avoid a deadlock and — as several members wanted to believe, or at least to hope — to resolve the financial problem of this Organization. However, the problem still exists, and the terms of the agreement which had seemed to offer a solution have remained, to some, a dead letter.
5. The additional difficulties now facing us are of a different kind, but there is little doubt that the damage the United Nations has suffered could have been avoided had there been greater adherence to the principles of our Charter. As it is, we must admit that the United Nations has accomplished only a very small part of the mission entrusted to it under the Charter.
6. The Greek delegation certainly does not wish to criticize anyone's attitude. It is simply trying to give this Assembly its view of the situation in which our community finds itself and endeavouring to seek out ways by which that community can hold back from the slippery incline onto which events have led it.
7. Along with you, Mr. President, we are saying that it is necessary to "intensify the efforts of all countries to find a solution for the problems of the world of today" [1560th meeting, paragraph 80].
8. The fact that the labours of the fifth emergency special session failed to produce results satisfactory to all, or even to the great majority of Member States, was an indication of the differences in their outlook and in their conception of the way in which the Charter should be implemented.
9. Keeping that fact uppermost, unsatisfactory and disturbing though it may be, we are still forced to recognize that the United Nations, after evaluating the results of events and after as objective an analysis as possible of the opinions of Members, as fully expressed during the debates of the emergency special session, has nevertheless implicitly shown that it does not foresee, at any rate for the time being, any solution to the crisis other than that which the conflicting countries may themselves put forward.
10. If, as we think, that interpretation is correct, it is the duty of the United Nations to allow for the possibility that that path might not lead to a solution and to be prepared to carry out its responsibilities.
11. While fully aware of our Organization's limitations, we believe that we have the obligation, individually and jointly, to draw the necessary conclusions from the recent events and crises, the present world situation, and the threat which all these constitute not only to the United Nations, but to all mankind.
12. In the hope that such a spirit of allegiance to the principles of the Charter will guide the steps of our Assembly at its present session, I should like briefly to set forth the position of the Greek delegation on some of the most important items on our agenda. 
13. We continue to believe that disarmament should be given high priority among our concerns. The need to put an end to the arms race, and to undertake disarmament until such time as a new balance of power based on general and complete disarmament under international control can be established, has long been an article of faith among world public opinion.
14. Firm in that conviction, it is with hope and deep satisfaction that we welcome the submission of identical draft treaties on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons by the United States of America and the Soviet Union. As a non-nuclear country, Greece cannot but feel apprehensive of the threat of "nuclear blackmail," particularly since it is unlikely that, for some time at any rate, a treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons will gain universal acceptance. However, Greece will take a positive and constructive attitude towards efforts leading to the conclusion of a non-proliferation treaty — a workable treaty designed to contribute to world security.
15. In that same spirit, we take note of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America. That is an agreement which would appear to fulfil the conditions which we consider essential in such cases, namely: first, that there should be a meeting of minds on the part of the countries of the region; second, that the agreement arrived at should substantially strengthen the security of the region; and third, that the agreed denuclearization must not disturb the world balance of power.
16. We believe that those two treaties — on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and on the denuclearization of Latin America — are two effective steps towards general and complete disarmament.
17. While disarmament is the long-term solution to the problem of peace, peace still has to be maintained on a short-term basis. In order to meet this need, the United Nations has setup machinery for peace-keeping operations based on voluntary contributions. The usefulness of these operations can hardly be denied; they proved their worth during some ten years in the Middle East, and they still do so in Cyprus. But despite its usefulness and even its necessity, our Organization has been unable to put this peace-keeping machinery on the sound financial basis which would make it an efficient and uncontroversial instrument for peace. It is inconceivable that the United Nations should not be able to solve the problem. The difficulties arising from a difference in interpretation of Charter provisions must not become an obstacle to efforts towards peaceful existence in the international community.
18. During more than twenty years of experience, the United Nations has developed certain ideas, certain principles and criteria which have enabled it to overcome real difficulties, We have in mind the principle according to which less economically developed Member States must bear only a lesser share of the financial burden, but have at the same time a collective financial responsibility in all the activities of our Organization. 19. If we base ourselves on that principle and let ourselves be guided by the spirit of the Charter and by the conviction that the development of a system of peace-keeping operations is of overriding importance, we are bound to reach a pragmatic solution that will take into account the genuine concerns and interests of all Members.
20. As regards decolonization, the position of Greece remains what it has been since the beginning of the United Nations. The Greek delegation will unreservedly support all measures promoting the liberation of peoples from foreign domination, their free self-determination and the attainment and safeguarding of their independence.
21. While the progress that has been achieved towards decolonization, thanks to the United Nations, is encouraging, it is on the other hand regrettable that stagnation seems to have set in in the case of some peoples, particularly in Africa, who have not been able to set out on the true road towards decolonization.
22. A good and sure method is to take facts into account and to seek out realistic solutions. But whereas moderation and a spirit of compromise may be displayed in the search for solutions, we must be firm and uncompromising where principles are involved. We believe that a solution to the problem of the Territory of South West Africa could and should be found on the basis of those considerations.
23. The special session convened a few months ago set up machinery which could lend itself to the peaceful solution of that problem. Unfortunately, there is no hopeful indication that progress towards application of the principles of the Charter in the case of the people and Territory of South West Africa is in sight. That is all the more regrettable in that what we are debating here today is a political problem which may well deteriorate into a security problem having serious international implications.
24. Recent reports from Southern Rhodesia constitute a warning that should provide food for thought to all of us, but more particularly to those among us who hold the key to the solution of that problem.
25. We cannot speak of the danger of creating hotbeds of trouble without recalling those that already exist, namely, the Middle East and Viet-Nam.
26. At the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly, the Greek delegation had the opportunity to state its position [1542nd meeting] on a situation which, arising as it does in a region bordering on Greece, is bound to be of close concern to it. 
27. In view of the Importance of the problem, I must restate now the basic concepts which have determined my country's position. Greece has long historical ties of uninterrupted friendship with the peoples of that region. It wishes to see those peoples living in peace and devoting themselves to the task of progress and prosperity. Obviously the territorial integrity of their countries is an essential prerequisite for that task. However, the recent war has encroached upon that territorial integrity. We in Greece believe that in the United Nations era, in the middle of the  twentieth century, it is inconceivable that territories can be gained by force.
28. In signing the Charter, we solemnly pledged ourselves not to resort to force in settling our disputes. There can therefore be no other outcome to the Middle East crisis than that which may be achieved through political and peaceful means, and by the withdrawal of the occupying forces. It is distressing to note that two months after the adoption of the General Assembly resolutions condemning the annexation of Jerusalem, the territory of the Holy City remains subject to provisions imposed by military force. We are convinced that calm cannot be restored in the Middle East so long as the results of military action are not eliminated and so long as the peaceful means set forth in the Charter are not applied, with a view to the lasting solution of the Middle East problem.
29. In that regard, we support the suggestion of a United Nations presence in the Middle East put forth by the Secretary-General in the Introduction to his annual report [A/6701/Add.1, paragraph 48].
30. As for the war in Viet-Nam, Greece has nothing but the greatest sympathy and understanding for the South Viet-Namese people's struggle against subversion and infiltration. Since the United Nations is a forum for negotiations and goodwill, we believe it is its duty to be on the watch for any sign of a possible solution and to be ready to encourage and assist those who give evidence of such intentions.
31. In the area of social development and the advancement of the freedoms, rights and dignity of peoples and individuals, the United Nations has already accomplished a considerable task. Nevertheless, the vastness of the problems involved in the raising of the level of society in a great number of developing countries — problems such as the struggle against illiteracy, the struggle against disease, hunger and unemployment — calls for new efforts. The impetus given to the struggle against illiteracy through the initiative of His Imperial Majesty the Shahanshah of Iran must not be allowed to slacken. All the numerous obstacles to social development are so many hidden enemies of progress, order and peace in the world. Their elimination is a task we must unremittingly pursue.
32. In the pursuit of that task, we must obviously pursue our efforts to promote the economic development of the less-favoured countries in our community and to reduce to a minimum the gap between developed and developing countries.
33. In recent years, the flow of financial resources to the developing countries has lagged far behind the rate of growth in national income of the industrialized countries, even though most of the developing countries could make immediate use of a greater amount of outside assistance.
34. Outside aid can play a double role in development. On the one hand, it can be used to augment the resources of the developing countries and, on the other, it can be of use in the mobilization and more efficient utilization of those countries' resources. Due attention should therefore be paid not only to industrialization but also to the development of agriculture and food production. A concerted effort by both developed and developing countries will he needed to increase the effectiveness of outside aid, In general, the terms of development loans remain rather hard, and the trend towards the improvement of those terms has recently suffered setbacks. New efforts are called for, not only to ease the terms of loans in general, but also to standardize the terms under which various developed countries are assisting Individual developing countries. The Indebtedness of developing countries, and, in particular, the increasing burden resulting from the servicing of contracted loans threaten to bring about a serious reduction in the net transfer of resources.
35. We think we should stress the importance we attach to the second session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to be held at New Delhi In February of next year. It seems to me that the General Assembly must endeavour to create a more favourable climate for assistance to and trade with the developing countries.
36. It is obvious that, apart from immediate problems, the General Assembly must also consider long-term problems. The World Food Programme put into effect in 1961 is now inadequate. Large-scale programmes should be based on a multilateral approach and included in the preliminary work for the next decade. All national and international machinery should be mobilized for the eradication or hunger and the fear of hunger among the peoples of our planet.
37. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) should not confine itself solely to an operational approach, but should also carry out promotional work for continued action in a field which calls for extensive and varied efforts. Similarly, the UNIDO work programme should not be limited to study and research, but should also be action-oriented. The scope and flexibility evidenced by the United Nations Development Programme augurs well for that organization's close co-operation with UNIDO.
38. Greece is happy to be able to extend its hospitality to the International Symposium on Industrial Development which Is to be held at Athens in December 1967, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2178 (XXI) of 9 December 1966. That meeting is of basic importance to UNIDO, since it will assist in the establishment of its work programme and in defining its policy. It will also provide an opportunity for an exchange of valuable information on technical matters. That meeting will make a vital contribution to the efforts developing countries arc putting forth to set in motion their industrialization process, Greece will spare no efforts and will do all In its power to ensure the fullest success of the Symposium.
39. Before concluding, the Greek delegation deems it useful to reassert the firm intention of the Greek Government to continue in its policy of good relations with all countries of the international community, irrespective of differences in political and social systems. Greece has always based its policy on respect for the sovereignty, independence, dignity and legitimate interests of other States. It has scrupulously applied the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. The ways and means it has employed In the implementation of that policy are the peaceful ways and means laid down in the United Nations Charter and in international law. Greece has succeeded in establishing relations ranging from normal to friendly with almost all the Members of our Organization, and it will not fail to do its utmost to expand and improve those relations.
40. The continued efforts made quite recently by the Greek Government to improve its relations with Turkey, which have been in a state of serious crisis for several years, must be viewed in this context.
41. Last year, during the twenty-first session of the General Assembly, the Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs stated [1426th meeting] that the Governments of Greece and Turkey had decided to hold discussions on Greek-Turkish relations as a whole in the hope of facilitating a settlement of the question of Cyprus. Contacts between the two Governments have been maintained up to the present time, unfortunately without any positive results. I would prefer to refrain at this juncture from any comments on the reasons for which we are unable to attain our objectives. My Government, for its part, engaged in the discussions with a sincere desire for their success. In the search for a peaceful solution, the Greek Government, acting in the matter in complete accord with the Government of Cyprus, has been guided by two basic principles: first, that any solution to the Cyprus problem should express the will of the people of Cyprus as a whole; and second, that any solution should be in keeping with the spirit and the letter of the United Nations Charter. These principles cannot but meet with the full and complete support of our Organization, and it is within that framework that my Government is ready and willing to pursue its efforts towards a just and permanent solution.
42. We are also aware of the need for maintaining peace on the island until a final solution is found. It is precisely this task which the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus is performing at the present time, and I should like to take this opportunity to express here my Government's gratitude to the countries which have contingents serving in that Force or which are contributing to it financially. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General, and to his assistants and all personnel of the Force, for their efforts in the accomplishment of that highly important mission. Recent events in the Middle East have proved how essential the role of the United Nations is in the maintenance of peace. We do not, however, overlook the fact, so meaningfully stressed in the Secretary-General's annual report [A/6701, page 18], that this situation must not be prolonged indefinitely; it is precisely to this end that my Government will continue to devote all its efforts. Greece wants to believe that reciprocal intentions exist on the Turkish side.
43. May I conclude my statement with a fervent appeal for a redoubling of efforts aimed at the restoration and maintenance of peace, at the consolidation of the rule of justice and equity, at the strengthening of collaboration between the States and nations of our planet.
44. We consider that the recommendations of the Secretary-General with regard to the rehabilitation of the institutions set up under the Charter for the pacific settlement of disputes among States [A/6701/ Add.1, paragraphs 155 to 160] should be given serious attention by our Assembly. The threefold provisions — the International Court of Justice, the good offices of the Secretary-General, the periodic meetings of the Security Council under Article 28, paragraph 2, of the Charter — can indeed be usefully employed.
45. If nationalism, the new dimensions of which were so well defined by our Secretary-General only a few days ago in Kinshasa, seems to stand in the way of that goal, we should not forget that there are other factors representative of the temper of the human community which constitute, beyond any doubt, a source of hope and confidence.
46. I have in mind the agreements which have been concluded or which are being planned on an international level concerning certain aspects of disarmament, At another level, I have in mind the definite and, I hope, decisive rapprochement which has lately been achieved on the question of the unification of the Christian churches.
47. The Greek people who, during the several thousand years of their existence, have shaped their history in the light of ideals drawn from both spiritual and secular sources without distinction, is prepared yet again to contribute to the advancement of civilization and human well-being. We are now, as in the past, determined to spare no effort which can serve and promote peace, justice and international cooperation, and which may clear the way for development, progress and civilization.