132. Mr. President, on behalf of the people and the Government of Iran, may I extend to you our most heartfelt congratulations on your election as President of the twenty-second session of the General Assembly. Your election to this high office is a just tribute to you personally, as well as a reflection of the position which is held today by the socialist Republic of Romania in the council of nations. I had the good fortune to visit Romania last August and I was able to witness the deep commitment of the Government and people of Romania to the cause of peace and international understanding. My visit to your country, Mr. President, gave me an opportunity to note with deep interest your accomplishments and to learn about the high hopes and aspirations of your people for the future.
133. This Assembly faces a number of critical issues vital to our peace and security. We are indeed fortunate to benefit from your wise guidance and leadership. In the performance of the great task with which you are entrusted, you can be sure of the close and sincere co-operation of the Iranian delegation.
134. I should like also to thank Mr. Pazhwak, my Afghan brother for presiding with great distinction at three successive sessions of the General Assembly. The duration of his office, the critical issues he had to cope with, and the ability with which he presided during these sessions makes us aware of the debt of gratitude that all of us owe to him. I should like to thank him sincerely for his dedication and ceaseless efforts.
135. The present session of the General Assembly has opened under more alarming circumstances than those which prevailed last year. Unfortunately, the problems which were then before the Assembly are still before us today. In fact, new conflicts have flared up and more menacing problems have emerged.
136. In many corners of the world millions of our fellow men are denied their fundamental rights and are subjected to intolerable racial discrimination creating a highly explosive situation. Guns are thundering anew in certain parts of Africa. The war in Viet-Nam continues at an ever increasing pace. In the Middle East especially, we are confronted with a most urgent problem threatening world peace.
137. Economic problems facing the world are growing to an incredible proportion, while the rate of economic progress in developing countries remains alarmingly slow.
138. In the meantime, the United Nations, upon which rests our greatest hope for the preservation of peace and the well-being of mankind, is becoming progressively less equipped to serve effectively the wider and larger interest of world peace, Indeed, we must admit that the credit of the United Nations has sunk steadily.
139. I turn now to specific issues of crucial importance. As my Governments views on these issues have already been expressed on several occasions, I shall confine my remarks to certain problems which, in our opinion, require greater attention.
140. The Middle East crisis is uppermost in our mind. In view of the ties of faith and culture that bind us to the Arab peoples it is but natural that we should consider this issue with a great sense of urgency and do our utmost to ensure its settlement on a satisfactory basis.
141. The Assembly may recall that at the recent emergency special session we held the view [1530th meeting] that an arrangement for withdrawal from occupied territories was an essential step towards the achievement of a peaceful solution. And I am certain that it is appreciated by all of us here that unless withdrawal is achieved, feelings of antagonism will grow and create a barrier in the way of peaceful settlement. It was most unfortunate that the General Assembly could not find an appropriate way to express what I am sure is the general view that there is no validity to titles obtained by force. In this connexion, we may remember that His Majesty the Shahanshah was the first Head of State to declare as early as 7 June 1967 that:
"The days of occupation and retention by force of one country’s territory by another are over. Undoubtedly, arrangements should be made whereby that part of Arab territory occupied by Israel during the present hostilities may be returned ... as soon as possible."
142. These views were further elaborated on 31 July, at the end of the Ramsar Conference of the Heads of State and Government of Pakistan, Turkey and Iran, who expressed their deep concern at the aggravation of tensions in the Middle East and the continuance of threats to peace and stability in the area. They reiterated their belief that acquisition of territory by the use of force is contrary to the provisions of the United Nations Charter. In this context, they reaffirmed that withdrawal of Israeli forces from Arab territories was essential for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. And they further reaffirmed their opposition to the unilateral measures taken by Israel to change the status of Jerusalem and stressed the urgency of the implementation of the resolutions passed by the United Nations General Assembly on this question. They also reiterated their sympathy for the victims of the recent conflict and emphasized the urgency of rendering the maximum humanitarian assistance to alleviate their suffering.
143. It is our earnest hope that it will be possible, in the course of the debate on this question, for the General Assembly to provide the necessary arrangements for the realization of the objectives to which I have just referred. These arrangements, to be workable, must take into account that the parties and States generally, in signing the Charter and renouncing the use of force in their international relations, have undertaken an obligation of mutuality and reciprocity on which both sides are entitled to rely.
144. My Government is greatly concerned at the continuation of the war in Viet-Nam. Our basic position on this issue has had public expression. The right of the people of Viet-Nam to decide their own future without interference from outside is undeniable and cannot be questioned. The war has caused the people of Viet-Nam untold sufferings. Efforts should be intensified to bring about a settlement on the basis of the 1954 Geneva Agreements.
145. The urgency of a restoration of the peace-keeping capacity of the United Nations needs no demonstration. Our position with regard to this question is well-known and will be further elaborated in the appropriate Committee. But what I do wish to emphasize at this point is our endorsement of the Secretary-General’s suggestion contained in the introduction to his annual report [see A/6701/Add.1, para. 31].
146. I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for his valuable work, and in particular his sincere efforts to keep alive the promise that the United Nations should become an effective instrument for peace.
147. Through the forum of this Assembly we seek peace and security in pursuit of our declared policy of peaceful and constructive co-existence. Active international co-operation directed towards the construction of a sound and expanding world economy, in which all nations are assisted in resolving their problems and satisfying their aspirations, appears to be an essential course of action to follow.
148. Yet, at a recent session, the Economic and Social Council expressed concern about the unsatisfactory progress in the achievement of the objectives of the United Nations Development Decade. In its evaluation, it has admitted that even the modest target of growth of 5 per cent per annum has not been achieved. [See Economic and Social Council resolutions 1152 (XLI) and 1089 (XXXIX),] Food shortages and threats of famine in many parts of the world constitute a most serious problem for developing countries.
149.	The present circumstances are such that the gap between the advanced and the developing nations is widening all the time. Whatever the causes, the result is that the present international community is sharply divided into rich and poor nations. The continuance of the present situation is not only against the interest of the highly developed countries, but is also a source of great danger to world peace and security. It is the expectation of the developing countries that the more advanced nations will pay greater attention to their legitimate needs. It is not, however, my country's view that the rich countries' offers of assistance should take the form of grants. Indeed, we advocate close and constructive co-operation which serves the interest of all concerned.
150. For our part, my country has devoted its full attention to the problems of development. As a result of the far-reaching social, political and economic reform programmes which have been carried out, the Iranian economy has been developing at a rate of growth of 10 per cent per annum. This is truly symbolic of our revolution for progress. And we intend to continue on that course during our fourth Five-Year Development Plan, which is due to start in March 1968.
151. It is our view that by active regional and international co-operation we can accelerate the pace of our development. As this august body is aware, Pakistan, Turkey and Iran are carrying out a comprehensive programme of economic co-operation within the framework of Regional Co-operation for Development.
152. Already there has been significant progress in this programme, but we have not confined our interest to the level of regional co-operation. Indeed, we have been equally interested in wider international co-operation in the economic field.
153. In that context I should like to state that we attach great importance to the future of the activities of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, The Ministers of Economy of seventy- seven developing countries will soon meet at Algiers in order to determine their course of action at the second session of the Conference. We sincerely hope that their views and policies will receive sympathetic consideration by the developed nations at the New Delhi Conference.
154. Our preoccupation with persistent international issues and mounting crises should not make us lose sight of the fact that the United Nations has made significant progress in a number of fields. I refer particularly to the question of human rights where, by its constant endeavours and probing, the United Nations has done much to uphold the dignity of man throughout the world.
155. The two International Covenants on Human Rights are vivid examples of the work accomplished by the United Nations. Yet more ought to be done, and the scheduled meeting of the International Conference on Human Rights has its own share of contributions to make.
156. The fact that Iran is to be privileged to be host to that important Conference in 1968 is, I submit, a proof of our deep attachment to the cause of human rights. It is the wish of my Government, which looks forward to welcoming the distinguished participants to our capital, that the Conference adopt constructive measures to further ensure the fulfilment of human rights and fundamental freedoms the world over.
157. During the twenty-first session of the General Assembly we had occasion to welcome the agreement reached between the major space Powers, which culminated in the conclusion of Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. The presentation to the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament in August by the United States of America and the USSR of identical drafts of a non-proliferation treaty gives us grounds to anticipate that the conclusion of a treaty on that urgent question will not be far off.
158. So much for the past. What of the future? It is peace the world seeks. We must have peace no matter how great the problems. It is a matter of regret that the provisions of the United Nations Charter are often disregarded when there are major disagreements. Nevertheless, it is our firm belief that it is the United Nations that can offer assurance for peace. Hence, if we are to have peace, all other considerations must be subordinated to the task of equipping the Organization for the effective discharge of its responsibility. Too many sources of danger exist in the world today to permit us to question that imperative. And this thought brings me again to the all-important question of the peace-keeping capacity of the United Nations. It is difficult to imagine how the United Nations can work effectively unless agreed procedures for peacekeeping operations are evolved. The maintenance of peace is a collective action requiring the understanding, assistance and forbearance of every one of us.
159. Some time ago my Government offered to place permanent peace-keeping forces at the disposal of the United Nations. Today that pledge stands as valid as ever.
160. I should like to conclude by quoting a passage from my Sovereign's last book, The White Revolution, which underlines the essence of our foreign policy:
"We seek peace, coexistence, and better understanding with other nations, whatever their ideologies may be; we will always support any endeavours for the establishment and furtherance of social justice; we will assist efforts in bridging the gap between the poor and rich nations of the world; and will support any plans for international co-operation, campaigns against illiteracy, poverty, disease and other contemporary social ills,
"These firm beliefs have been our guide in international situations, and have enabled us to defend the principles of right without hesitation or doubt."