79. Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to commence my address by conveying to Your Excellency the congratulations of the Libyan delegation on the occasion of your unanimous election as President of the General Assembly at its twenty-second session. The trust that the Assembly has shown in you, Sir, is the best testimony to your distinguished qualifications and experience which are admired by all. Your election also bears witness to the great respect that our Organization has for the friendly country of Romania.
80. I should also like to take this occasion to pay a tribute to your election as the first President of the General Assembly from the socialist countries, which is a welcome sign for the promotion of understanding and co-operation between the different political and ideological blocs. This will also strengthen the universality and effectiveness of this Organization. 
81. The Libyan delegation trusts, Mr. President, that, thanks to your well-known sagacity and tact, the deliberations of this session will be conducted to a successful conclusion. We earnestly hope that under your leadership the Assembly will be able to deal with the crucial and delicate questions inscribed on its agenda, reaching sound and equitable solutions in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and the principles of peace and justice.
82. I also wish to seize this opportunity to extend the Libyan delegation’s sincere greetings to your predecessor, Ambassador Abdul Rahman Pazhwak of Afghanistan, and pay him a well-deserved tribute for his outstanding competence in conducting the deliberations of the twenty-first session as well as the last two special sessions, and for his objectivity and dedication to the principles and purposes of our Organization.
83. It also gives me great pleasure to extend our thanks to the Secretary-General, U Thant, for his dedication to the service of this Organization and for his sincere efforts to promote the implementation of the principles of its Charter.
84. When the twenty-first session adjourned, it was our hope that the twenty-second session would be convened under more auspicious circumstances and in an international atmosphere bearing greater promise for peace, which is the first aspiration of the peoples of the world. We had hoped that world tensions would abate, placing the Assembly in a better position to deal with international issues and to move forward on the road to peace, Justice and freedom, and opening wider horizons for sincere co-operative efforts between all peoples for the welfare of all, for raising the standards of our human society and for safeguarding its progress and prosperity.
85. But, alas, the twenty-second session is now convening in extremely adverse circumstances and in an atmosphere of tension and anxiety marked by the spread of wrong-doing and aggression in various parts of the world. Needless to say, the world situation has been seriously aggravated by the ominous events and tragic developments of last summer which led to the convening of the Security Council and the General Assembly in the fifth emergency special session in the wake of the treacherous aggression engineered and carried out against our Arab homeland by the forces of Zionist colonialism.
86. The Arabs of Palestine have been straggling for half a century to safeguard their legitimate rights and defend their country in the face of brutal Zionist colonialism. They have sought to lay bare the truth before the world and to reveal the true objectives of the Zionist conspiracy in Palestine, but all their efforts have unfortunately gone unheeded. The General Assembly was misled by interests of aggressive colonialist Powers, sponsoring the Zionist aggression and having common cause with it, into adopting a partition resolution [181 (II)] acquiescing to the establishment in the midst of our Arab homeland of an artificial entity founded on conquest and aggression and whose purpose is to satisfy the insatiable ambitions of world Zionism. We had sought to find various excuses for the General Assembly when it committed that grave injustice to the Palestinian people in the pressures exerted on it by the great Powers. Today we cannot but regret to see the United Nations continue on a course that was forced upon it under certain historical circumstances. Such a course is indeed all the more regrettable, now that the majority is formed by the nations of the Third World, by peoples who have themselves thrown off the yoke of colonialism, and at a time when the Assembly has already adopted historic decisions on the elimination of the last vestiges of imperialism and exploitation, notably the historic resolution 1514 (XV) on the liquidation of colonialism. 87. If, despite the calamity and endless suffering entailed, a single positive aspect is to be found in the events of last June, it is that they have exposed to world opinion the true objectives of Zionism and its expansionist designs. These tragic events have undoubtedly contributed to a clarity of vision in the United Nations so that there can no longer be any excuse for this Organization in the eyes of peace-loving peoples and in the judgement of history if it continues co evaluate the Palestine question and handle it in the same framework and through the same distorted perspective which caused the catastrophe twenty years ago. For any repetition by the United Nations of the same mistake today would be tantamount to renunciation of its grave responsibilities and abandonment of the principles of peace, justice and freedom embodied in its Charter, principles to which it owes its very existence.
88. Whatever the situation obtaining in the General Assembly, and no matter how slow the turning of world opinion with regard to the Palestine question might be, one thing remains certain, and that is that neither the pressure of the forces of domination and exploitation-nor the outpourings of Zionist information media can succeed indefinitely in covering up aggression and in distorting the truth. For, as Abraham Lincoln said, "You can fool some of the people all of the time and all of the people some of the time, but you can’t fool all of the people all of the time." The world will surely awake one day to the realization of what has been taking place in the Arab East, and the smoke-screen of falsehood and deceit raised by Zionist propaganda will ultimately vanish into thin air.
89. The General Assembly was convened in emergency special session at the request of the Soviet Union in the wake of the brutal Zionist aggression against the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan. It was our hope that the special session would be able to take positive action to eliminate the consequences of an aggression perpetrated against three Member States by forcing the aggressors to respect the principles of international justice; but after lengthy discussions and arduous consultations, the Assembly failed to reach a just solution. That had the effect of encouraging the forces of domination and aggression to persist in their arrogance and conceit; the Israeli occupation authorities have this shamelessly refused to implement even the two partial resolutions adopted on Jerusalem and the refugees. The events of the last few months in the occupied Arab territories clearly indicate that the Israeli authorities are determined to continue to ignore the United Nations resolutions, and to persist in their flagrant defiance of world public opinion and in their violation of the principles of the United Nations Charter.
90. If the United Nations yields to the pressure of Zionism or acquiesces to those pressures directly or indirectly, it will have moved the world backwards by establishing the dangerous precedent that might makes right in international relations and that the aggressor can reap and enjoy the fruits of his aggression.
91. I do not hesitate at this point to address myself in all sincerity to the adherents of the Jewish faith in order to remind them of the injustice which is perpetuated in their name against the Arab people, which in all its history was, and still is, free of any racial prejudice. The Arabs, Moslems and Christians, whose land is the birthplace of religions, cannot but have every respect, esteem and reverence for Judaism as a great religion. The Arabs have never been against the presence of Jews in their midst. On the contrary, history tells us that they have lived in great harmony with their Arab brethren and that a number of them assumed high public office in some Arab States. It is indeed the Zionist movement which has sought and is still seeking to create barriers between religions and to use them as a vehicle for the realization of its expansionist designs. For this fanatical movement, which came into being under peculiar historical circumstances, has seized upon anti-Semitism as a means to rally Jews under its banner and to implicate them in its adventures and in the execution of its conspiracy against the people of Palestine in particular, and against the Arabs in general.
92. The General Assembly, at this twenty-second session, has agreed to discuss the question of the recent aggression in its entirety. For as we meet here, the forces of Zionist aggression are occupying the territories of three Member States and are carrying on their acts of intimidation and oppression against the unarmed Palestinian people. Israel has also insulted sacred religious values and damaged Moslem and Christian places of worship. We read reports of Israeli atrocities against the nationalists in the occupied areas and hear news of arrests, deportations, imprisonments without trial, and various other forms of intimidation.
93. Moreover, Israel has undertaken certain basic measures designed to change the administrative and educational structure of the occupied areas. I may mention here that even the property and personnel of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force did not escape Israeli aggression and arrogance. We read in the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations Emergency Force [A/6672] how United Nations property was looted and its personnel molested by the Israeli troops. The latest news of Israeli settlements in the illegally occupied areas, in defiance of the United Nations Charter, testifies to their expansionist and territorial ambitions. In this connexion, I would invite all Members of this Assembly to compare these facts with the statements we all heard from various Israeli leaders at the beginning of the present crisis—that their war was purely defensive and that they sought neither territorial expansion nor conquest. But the facts speak for themselves and reveal once again the true character and ambitions of the Zionist forces in Palestine.
94. Unless the United Nations adopts, promptly and before it is too late, adequate measures for the cessation of aggression and the elimination of its consequences by demanding and enforcing the immediate withdrawal of the troops of aggression from the territories which they illegally occupy, the state of tension and war prevailing in the Middle East, which is a threat to world peace and security, could have far-reaching and unpredictable consequences and could lead to a disaster encompassing all mankind. We appeal to the General Assembly to rise to the level of its responsibilities and not to frustrate once more the expectations of peace-loving peoples and their hope of finding a solution consistent with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
95. We resolutely support the struggle of the Arab people in South Arabia, as well as the rights of the Arab people in Oman, and call upon the United Nations to take more effective action for the speedy granting of independence to that region. We also oppose all attempts to internationalize the island of Perim and other off-shore islands, as those are Arab lands falling within the territorial sovereignty of the occupied South.
96. While Zionist aggression has reached its peak in the Middle East, forces of colonialism and aggression are still entrenched in a last-ditch battle in various parts of the world where they face the revolt of the enslaved peoples who are struggling for their liberation from foreign domination.
97. The war raging in Viet-Nam has only increased in intensity, in spite of the great efforts made by peace-loving forces to put an end to that devastation which is causing so much suffering to the Viet-Namese people, and which constitutes a menace to the peace and security of the Far East and of the entire world. We had expected that the heavy losses suffered by both parties, together with the pressure of world opinion, would result in a lessening of the intensity of that conflict, and that both sides would show a greater inclination to peace. But, to our great disappointment, we see the war growing fiercer and more internecine, and the prospects of peace growing dimmer every day. We earnestly hope that the necessary reconciliation and essential environment for a just solution in Viet-Nam will be created in accordance with the Geneva Agreements of 1954.
98. The Libyan delegation wishes to express its grave concern regarding the situation prevailing in those African lands which are still suffering under the yoke of colonialism and regarding the persistence of the Government of the Republic of South Africa in its policies of apartheid and racial discrimination. Despite numerous United Nations resolutions condemning those policies and calling for the safeguarding of the fundamental rights of the people of South Africa, the South African Government is still acting in complete disregard of those resolutions and in flagrant violation of the most fundamental principles of human rights, both in South Africa and South West Africa.
99. The people of Mozambique have been struggling for years to expel colonialism from their land, and the people of Angola and so-called Portuguese Guinea are struggling to exercise the most fundamental of those human rights proclaimed in the Charter of this Organization.
100. In Southern Rhodesia the white minority is practicing all forms of oppression against the nationalist elements, in complete disregard for all the resolutions adopted by the United Nations confirming the legitimate rights of the Zimbabwe people. We strongly denounce the intrigues of foreign economic interests seeking to impede the granting of independence to those colonial Territories and lending assistance and support to all the racist regimes in the southern part of Africa.
101. International peace and security are still in danger in various parts of the world. The establishment of stability will necessarily depend upon the settlement of disputes and international problems in accordance with the principles of justice enshrined in the Charter.
102. Libya is following with keen interest the meetings taking place in Geneva in order to reach agreement on general disarmament. We support these endeavours aiming at disarmament, the cessation of nuclear tests and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The great advantage of such an achievement could be weighed in terms of the immense progress made if the resources now spent on war purposes were diverted to peaceful endeavours and to economic development of the many regions of this world where poverty and ignorance still prevail.
103. While the present political situation in the world calls for dedication, resolve and fruitful co-operation on the part of the world community at both official and private levels, in order to solve the most urgent problems menacing the future of mankind as a whole, the economic and social situation makes it incumbent upon us all, and more especially the economically advanced countries, to pursue an economic policy designed to meet some of the essential development requirements of the developing countries. The work accomplished by the United Nations Secretariat and the specialized agencies has provided us with many valuable studies and research findings on the current situation of the developing countries and their economic and social development needs. These studies have defined responsibilities in this respect on the national level and stressed the need to give developing countries the benefits of wider economic co-operation, better terms of trade, and an adequate financial assistance so as to enable them to build the necessary infrastructure for sustainable growth. These studies have also emphasized the importance of the development of these countries as an effective means to expand the volume of international trade in the interests of both developed and developing countries alike.
104. A major problem which has assumed acute proportions in many developing countries in recent years is the shortage of food production in relation to population and income growth. The Economic and Social Council discussed this question in some detail at its forty-third session and made constructive proposals dealing with its various aspects [see A/6703, paras. 112-122]. The Council also supported the efforts of the World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization, aiming at helping the developing countries to raise the quantity and improve the quality of their agricultural products and to develop new sources of nutrition through research and the application of modern scientific methods.
105. It is indeed a most regrettable fact that while man is embarked on conquering outer space and is literally reaching for the moon and other planets, he has not yet succeeded in conquering hunger, disease and ignorance on our planet. This great discrepancy between the needs of developing countries on the one hand and the adventures and goals of the developed countries on the other, simply reflects the tragedy which besets the world today. At a time when certain advanced nations are seeking to settle the planets and are spending huge sums of money for this purpose, the vast majority of the nations of the world are suffering from famine, disease and mass illiteracy. This gap is an obvious challenge to the human mind and the human conscience, especially at an age when distances have shrunk and when all nations must live together in one world.
106.  This grave situation leads me to speak of the need for further action in order to contribute to the achievement of higher levels of economic and social growth in developing countries. We know only too well that the Development Decade proclaimed by this Assembly seven years ago has failed to reach its goal because its most important conditions and prerequisites have not been met. To cite one example, namely, the volume of transfer of funds from the advanced to the developing countries, we find that this transfer has not even reached half the amount of the fixed target of 1 per cent annually of the national income of the advanced countries. At the same time there is a clear trend for capital movement from developing to developed countries in the form of profits and repayments of foreign debts.
107. The strong relationship between the development needs of the developing countries and their terms of trade has become evident for many years. The losses incurred by these countries as a result of the deterioration of their terms of trade have been analysed and clearly defined. The falling of prices of primary commodities which constitute the bulk of exports from the developing countries, together with the increase in the prices of manufactures imported by them, are costing these countries heavy financial losses every year.
108. The trade restrictions imposed by advanced countries on the developing countries' exports of manufactured goods further compound the difficulties encountered by the latter in the process of industrial development. We do hope, therefore, that the second session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development will concentrate on these problems in order to find adequate solutions, including the granting by the developed countries of concrete preferences to the exports of developing countries in general and manufactured goods in particular. Agreement on such action would enable developing countries to create modern industries utilizing domestic resources and would make available to them the foreign exchange needed to import their requirements of capital goods from the developed countries. Such an industrial development would also provide a strong incentive for the development of the agricultural sector, as both sectors are closely linked in structure and have complementary economic functions.
109. Speaking of industry, I wish to express our great satisfaction at the establishment of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and at its valuable accomplishments in spite of the various difficulties besetting it. We sincerely hope that the organization will be able to perform its role in the service of industrial development in the developing countries.
110. A carefully conceived and well-oriented social development programme is an essential condition for the success of the economic development process.
111. In addition to the more common social problems, such as the problems of over-population and widespread illiteracy in many developing countries, human society still pays a heavy toll of suffering and undergoes serious difficulties and crises as a result of social complexes such as those underlying the problem of racial discrimination, which is contrary to the requirements of economic and social development.
112. The Libyan delegation supports the efforts of the Human Rights Commission aiming at the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women. We firmly believe that these efforts will bring us closer to the noble and long-cherished ideals of justice. We also believe that these efforts are of great value to economic and social development in view of the prospects they open up for the development and better utilization of human resources. The proclamation of 1968 as an International Year for Human Rights should contribute to better awareness of human rights problems and the launching of greater efforts in this field. The Libyan delegation fully supports this action and wishes the Commission on Human Rights every success in its noble endeavours.
113. The question of co-ordination between United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other international organizations has become extremely complex and has aroused much talk but little action. Fortunately, indications of some progress in this direction can be found in the conclusions reached by the Economic and Social Council at its forty-third session. The guidelines approved by the Council tend to strengthen the role of the regional Commissions and the Resident Representatives of the United Nations Development Programme, and also to lessen the duplication and promote specialization in the agencies while emphasizing co-ordination at the Secretariat level and in the work of the Economic and Social Council itself. Our delegation believes that the efforts could enhance the effectiveness of our Organization and the specialized agencies in the service of both the developing and the developed countries.
114. Mr. President, in conclusion, I wish to express our earnest hope that the United Nations will move forward in the realization of the aspirations of the peoples of the world for a better life, I also wish to assure you of the Libyan delegation’s willingness to co-operate in every possible way in the achievement of our common goals and to contribute to the fullest measure in the success of this Organization’s efforts in the cause of peace, security and justice for all.