1. On behalf of the Chief of State, the Government and the people of Madagascar, allow me first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your election as President of the twenty-second session of the General Assembly. Like all the speakers who have preceded me, I see your election as an eloquent testimony not only to your outstanding abilities as a statesman, but also to your country, which we all of us admire.
2. Already in the last three weeks your impartiality, your wisdom, your indefatigable perseverance, and the orderly conduct of our debates, have made it clear that you are in the line of the great Presidents who have preceded you. Of these I shall mention only the distinguished President of the twenty-first session, Mr. Pazhwak, who so ably presided over the work of an exceptionally difficult session filled with dramatic incidents.
3. The lucid and pregnant report of Secretary- General U Thant has been given careful attention here. On behalf of my country I would like to assure him of our admiration for his constant efforts to seek peace and to promote the welfare of the developing nations. There is still a great deal for him to do before the end of the difficult and arduous road to peace is reached. But he should know that he has the support of all of us, including the strong support of my country, which remains loyal to the principles of the Charter.
4. Non-interference in the affairs of other countries; respect for the sovereignty and integrity of all Member States; avoidance of threats or the use of force; conciliation, negotiation, and arbitration: these are the guidelines of the foreign policy of my country. The Chief of State of Madagascar, President Tsiranana, has constantly reiterated them. In 1965 we requested the inclusion in the General Assembly's agenda of a special item embodying these principles, some of which were included in important resolutions adopted at the twenty-first session.
5. Before touching on political problems, my delegation would like briefly to refer to the issues which disturb us in regard to world economic trends and to express our regret, as many other delegations have done, that the Development Decade has not fulfilled the hopes of the Third World.
6. With but few exceptions — first and foremost among them France — the majority of the industrialized countries have not increased the volume of their international aid parallel with the growth of their national revenue, as they are pledged to do, at any rate by implication.
7. In its work, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) has systematically analysed the various aspects of the world economic situation and the causes of stagnation and recession; but it has not yet found practical and effective solutions. The forthcoming conference at New Delhi must resolutely and realistically work out a scheme which will give an effective fillip to world economy and, above all, narrow the widening gap — not to say chasm — between the standard of living of the industrialized countries and that of the developing nations.
8. The constant deterioration in the terms of trade has been so well covered by the many previous speakers that I need not dwell on it. One remedy, in my delegation's view, would be an international agreement establishing minimum prices and minimum tonnages on the major world markets for the main primary commodities. A system of compensation would provide producing countries each year with a minimum revenue from their essential production. At the last Conference of the International Monetary Fund at Rio de Janeiro, fourteen African States and France, having met specially at Dakar before the Conference, submitted a resolution asking the international financial organizations to make a study of the problem of prices of the main products. The resolution was adopted unanimously. The distinguished experts of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund will no doubt find realistic and speedy solutions.
9. The Malagasy Republic has participated actively in the efforts of the Organization to rid the world of colonialism completely. As a member of the Committee of Twenty-Four, Madagascar co-operated fully, not only in the meetings held in New York, but also in those held in Africa, We have scrupulously implemented the decisions concerning the African Territories under Portuguese administration, South West Africa and Rhodesia. We shall continue to fight with all our strength for the eradication of all forms of racial discrimination, especially the so- called system of apartheid.
10. My delegation remains faithful to the policy we adopted seven years ago and will at all times uphold the right of peoples to self-determination and independence. We are anxious that the peoples now so distressingly divided, those of Germany and Korea, for example, should be able freely to decide their own future. The same applies also, of course, to Viet-Nam, where we hope that peace will return through the speedy opening of negotiations, either directly between the parties concerned or by the convening of the Geneva Conference.
11. My delegation feels that the maintenance of UNCURK and of a United Nations Force in Korea is an essential condition for safeguarding peace. Wherever peace is threatened, a United Nations presence is, as we have noted elsewhere, a factor for moderation and dissuasion — in Cyprus for example.
12. It is because of our respect for these same principles that Madagascar cannot support the resolution calling for the admission of the Peking regime [A/L.531], since those who advocate a modification of the present state of affairs make no secret of their desire to force thousands of free Chinese to accept a solution which there is nothing to suggest is to their liking. There is in fact another and still more important point - a country cannot be a Member of the United Nations if it does not clearly and unequivocally accept the obligations of the Charter; and the fundamental principles of the Charter are peace, renunciation of the resort to force, and non-interference in the domestic affairs of other States. Unless these criteria are respected, my delegation will refuse to support the admission of any State, however powerful.
13. Africa is in the forefront of the battle for the freedom of peoples. Our strength lies in unity, which was impressively affirmed at the recent Kinshasa Conference. Very important problems affecting African States were frankly examined at the Conference, and the measures adopted are a very important step towards lasting solutions. Africa has again called for conciliation and dialogue to settle its differences. Giving the lie to pessimistic prophecies, the Organization of African Unity has once again shown how deeply rooted in the Africans is the desire for unity and co-operation.
14. The Malagasy Republic is convinced that it is only through understanding among nations that enduring peace can be established. This conviction explains our attitude in the distressing conflict that has broken out in the Middle East. Our feeling is that the best way to achieve true peace is frankly and persistently to seek peaceful formulas which will safeguard the existence and integrity of all the States concerned.15. My delegation continues to hope that common sense and moderation will prevail in both camps so that the present difficulties can be overcome, and feels that it is contributing to this by following the line of sympathetic understanding, friendship and objectivity vis-à-vis our brothers of the Arab States and Israel.
16. There are other no less important problems on our agenda. I spoke earlier of economic questions. There cannot be peace or lasting co-operation if the gap between the industrialized and the developing countries continues to widen as it has done over the past five years.
17. The instability of world markets for commodities is no doubt one of the most alarming aspects of this situation, but we must also not lose sight of the need to promote and increase the flow of capital and investments. My delegation is constantly repeating that an effective means by which the industrialized nations can help their less prosperous brothers is by encouraging investments in the latter’s countries so as to promote their industrialization.
18. Disarmament has always been another of the major concerns of this Assembly. We discuss it every year; progress is slow, but we must not lose heart. My own country is firmly convinced that gradual, simultaneous and controlled disarmament is the most realistic path to pursue.
19. The successful crystallization of a general agreement on the peaceful uses of outer space is a source of hope and encouragement; and further headway is possible.
20. Social questions again are an important part of our agenda. Here the United Nations has proved its moral strength, and resolutions condemning the various forms of discrimination, and favouring equal rights, and the safeguarding of individual freedom and the freedom of women, and the resolutions of the Sixth Committee on the rights and duties of States, do great credit to the Organization.
21. While we are only too well aware of the inadequacy of the Organization in many fields, we have reason to be proud of what it has achieved in the social sphere; and we can look towards the future with confidence. In a happier, freer world more aware of the importance of moral values, the evil forces of violence and war will rapidly lose ground.
22. The moral authority of the Organization grows with every year that passes. It is the duty of all of us to work courageously and sincerely at every task calculated to strengthen still further the United Nations — the strongest bulwark against war.
23. It is of course regrettable that the United Nations has been unable to solve certain critical problems. But let us not underrate the results of its efforts. In the majority of the armed conflicts which have broken out in the world, at any rate since 1960 when Madagascar became a Member, the United Nations has nearly always succeeded in bringing the parties to agree to a cease-fire, at times an uneasy truce, admittedly, but one which at least has stopped the bloodshed.  24. Signs of an easing of tension between the major Power blocs appear from time to time, but unfortunately they are ephemeral, and very soon the resentment, suspicion and mistrust return.
25. Within these walls dedicated to the maintenance of peace, let us all work with faith and perseverance so that the sources of conflict will disappear one by one and the hideous threat of a conflagration which would mean the end of mankind will gradually recede.