54. Mr. President, let me say first of all that the Romanian delegation is most gratified to see that the high office of President of the General Assembly, of whose great responsibilities the Member States are well aware, has been entrusted to you by so overwhelming a consensus. We see in this a mark of appreciation on the part of the Members of the Organization for Romania's foreign policy and the principles which govern it.
55. We too would like to associate ourselves with the warm tribute paid to your predecessor, Mr. Abdul Rahman Pazhwak, for the way in which he performed his duties, and to reiterate our high esteem for the Secretary-General of the United Nations, U Thant, whose experience and devotion are so vital to the proper functioning of the world body.
56. The present general debate, which reflects the disquiet we feel when we think of trouble spots throughout the world and the dangers they create for universal peace, is not mere lip service to tradition. The Member States exchange in this forum their experience, their analysis of events and their political thinking—matters which are of unquestionable interest to the international community. This broad exchange of views and ideas, one of the purposes of the Organization, cannot but foster the pursuit of the supreme goal set forth in the Charter; the peace and security of mankind.
57. In a world where every event that occurs has immediate repercussions on international relations as a whole, all countries are neighbours. Every step forward in the direction of co-operation and easing of tension, and similarly every crisis in international relations is bound to affect the life of each individual, since no man's fate can be insulated from that of his fellow men.
58. Romania, deeply engaged as it is in a process of peaceful development, is sensitive to all the phenomena of international life and endeavours to make its own contribution to the establishment of a climate of peace and active co-operation. At the extraordinary session of the Romanian Grand National Assembly held last July and devoted to Romania's international activities, Nicolae Ceausescu, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party, made the following statement:
"The foreign policy of the Socialist Republic of Romania reflects the profound aspirations of the Romanian people who, while dedicating their strength and their energies to the immense task, creative and peaceful, of building up a new system, at the same time exhibit a noble spirit of responsibility for the cause of socialism and social progress in the world, and for the fate of all mankind,"
59. Romania participates in international life in the conviction that forces exist in the world of today capable of coping with the threats to peace and of steering events on a rational and positive course. One basic prerequisite for the establishment of conditions in which mankind can solve the major problems of progress and civilization is strict respect for the sovereignty and independence of all States, and for the right of every people to decide its own destiny freely, without any interference from outside.
60. A characteristic feature of the age in which we live, one calculated to increase confidence in the capacity of the international community to solve its problems, is the steadily increasing participation of all countries, great and small, in that task.
61. Modern conditions of social development no longer fit in with the outdated notion that the fate of mankind is in the hands of a few privileged Powers. This is a notion which dates back to a time when dependence and servitude and the division of the world into spheres of influence placed limits on the participation of most States in international life.
62. The collapse of the colonial system has brought about the accession of large numbers of States to independence and the consolidation of the independence of certain countries, so that we are faced with a new factual situation in which inter-State relations take on a universal character and international life is given a new fillip and can enjoy the fruits of energies and benefits unknown until now. The principle of equal rights among States is thus strengthened, opening up new vistas and possibilities for all States to assert themselves politically. It is a stimulating principle embodying the need for all countries to participate in working out solutions to the problems confronting them.
63. Hard facts demonstrate the truth that a workable solution to international disputes cannot be found by a small group of Powers but calls for the active cooperation of all States throughout the world, on the basis of the principle of equality of rights.
64. It is no doubt true that the primary responsibility for safeguarding peace rests always with the great Powers by virtue of their potentialities and influence. The Charter confers upon them a special status in respect of matters relating to international security. But the most reliable yardstick by which their role in the world can be assessed is the sense of responsibility they show in championing the norms of international Justice and the way in which they observe the rules of peaceful co-existence, and the principle of equal rights of all countries, regardless of their size and stage of development.
65. The small and medium-sized countries can play an important role in creating a climate of mutual understanding and good neighbourliness in the service of Justice and international law. Thus in Europe, the small and medium-sized countries, whatever their military, political or philosophical affiliations, looking beyond the moments of cold war crisis, are increasing their contacts, exploring together a vast field of cooperation which for many years has lain fallow.
66. A thorough analysis of the dynamics of political life reveals the existence in Europe of movements which are a counter to reactionary and revanchist trends and make for the establishment of conditions propitious for security; and because we are firmly convinced that progress towards making European security a reality requires first and foremost the normalization and consolidation of bilateral relations between all European States, the Romanian Government, while continuing to develop its relations with the socialist countries as the pivot of its policy, has made fruitful contacts this year with Austria, Belgium, Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, Finland, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, Turkey and other countries. These contacts have helped to foster the atmosphere of relaxation and understanding which is making headway in Europe.
67. Life today demands the removal of artificial barriers; the refusal to accept the division of the world into antagonistic military blocs, which have hampered the flow of both goods and ideas; and the replacement of these obstacles by a climate of co-operation among all the countries of our continent. This is a sine qua non for the solution of the major problems of peace and security.
68. To our way of thinking, the complete return to normal inter-State relations in Europe on the basis of equality of rights for all States necessitates the withdrawal of all non-European troops from the continent, the withdrawal behind their national frontiers of all troops stationed on the territory of other States, the dismantling of foreign military bases and the break-up of blocs. A rational approach to European security demands a realistic and enlightened attitude towards the post-war world as it is, and first and foremost towards the existence of the two German States, and implies the creation of conditions in which both of them can participate actively, on an equal footing, in international life.
69. It is evident that the increasing rate of development of intra-European relations caters for objective needs and is the outcome of the efforts made by all countries, large and small, to help to ease tension in world affairs. 70. Because of the indivisible nature of world peace and security, Europe, and indeed the entire world, feels the impact of that grave violation of the norms of international conduct, the aggressive war being waged by the United States in Viet-Nam. Here one of the mightiest Powers of the world has mobilized its destructive capacity to bend the will of a people defending its homeland and its national identity, and to stifle its deep-rooted aspirations to independence, sovereignty and unity as a nation. The war in Viet-Nam has become a matter of conscience for contemporary society.
71. The fact of setting in motion a mammoth military apparatus to destroy a small people and prevent the fulfilment of aspirations for which every one of us would fight, even at the cost of the supreme sacrifice, has caused countries everywhere to take a vigorous stand, regardless of their adherence to this or that political system.
72. More than ever, during this debate, the warning signal is given to the United States, even by its allies and its closest friends, and it brings to mind words uttered In another historical context: "C'est plus qu'un crime, c'est une faute.” Thus a country having at its command a scientific and material potential which could be of inestimable value for man's highest endeavour s along the road towards the fulfilment of his peaceful aspirations projects the image of a Power which scatters destruction on a freedom-loving people. More and more voices are raised declaring that the United States cannot go on bombing a sovereign State, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, without thereby ruining the chances of any political solution and casting a shadow over international relations generally.
73. Reiterating our wholehearted solidarity with the Viet-Namese people and our full support for their just cause, we feel it is absolutely essential that the American bombing raids against the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam should be stopped immediately and unconditionally, that the aggression should be halted, and that the right of the Viet-Namese people to decide their own future should be recognized. We declare our conviction that the ending of the war in Viet-Nam, the most critical problem of international life, would have favourable repercussions on the search for a satisfactory solution of other outstanding international problems.
74. Equality of rights presupposes that in international relations peaceful methods of settling issues in dispute prevail over the use of force, which substitutes for equality the doctrine that "might is right" and thus undermines the very structure of international life. In today's world the use of force, even on a local scale, not only entails the risk of a rapid flare-up; it is also manifestly at variance with the mutual respect incumbent on States in their relations with others.
75. Conflicts building up over a long period in the Middle East have culminated in a new outbreak of violence which, far from settling the burdensome legacy of contentious issues, has further complicated them, at the same time increasing the danger they involve for world peace.
76. The attitude taken by the Romanian Government, as stated both before and after the outbreak of hostilities, namely that the only way of coping with the crisis is by a political settlement, has been borne out by the course of events.
77. The Romanian Government reaffirms its view that the issue of paramount importance and urgency at the present moment is the withdrawal of the Israel forces from the occupied territories to the lines they occupied before the outbreak of hostilities. We likewise consider improper the annexation measures taken by the Israel authorities with respect to Jerusalem, as well as all other claims to territorial gains achieved as a result of the use of force.
78. At the same time, in keeping with the principles to which we have all subscribed, every State in the region must be allowed the right to independent and sovereign existence, security, and peaceful development without interference of any kind.
79. The situation in the Middle East involves many problems which have been awaiting solution for a long time, many of them being fostered and aggravated by the intervention of foreign imperialist interests—the only ones with anything to gain from war.
80. As it has always maintained, the Romanian Government considers that the settlement of the differences between the countries of the Middle East must be effected not by military confrontation but through understanding 'and an approach in keeping with the interests of all the peoples living in the region. Firm in this belief, at the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly Romania joined with other delegations in trying to find a solution to the Arab-Israel conflict acceptable to the interested parties. The Romanian Government is of the opinion that a political settlement requires the use of the peaceful instruments forged in international practice and embodied in the Charter, while at the same time it considers that the main responsibility for the solution of the problems of the Middle East, on which hangs the economic and social development, indeed the peace, of the countries concerned, lies with the Governments and the peoples living in that part of the world.
81. We feel that an effective and lasting political solution in the Middle East is feasible. The debates at this session can make a real contribution towards the attainment of this goal by promoting a constructive, calm and patient approach to the problems involved, in the spirit of the Purposes and Principles of the Charter, which should be a source of inspiration for all our endeavours as Members of the Organization.
82. The principle of equal rights among States has made headway in international life against the background of differences in size, natural and human resources, and military and economic capacity.
83. The question whether these differences are becoming more marked as a result of certain uncontrolled processes or are decreasing as a result of collective efforts, is of particular significance in the military sphere.
84. It is noteworthy that in this field, too, the disparity between the various States is growing steadily. The differences have to do not only with the quantities of weapons which States have at their disposal. Nowadays States are divided into groups qualitatively distinct according to the nature of the weapons they possess, and we find a tendency to perpetuate and legalize this situation.
85. How, in these circumstances, is it possible to guarantee States equality of rights to peace and security? The answer to this question is to be sought in general disarmament, and first of all nuclear disarmament. This is the only way to lay the groundwork for eliminating the theory that "might is right" from international relations, establishing justice and fair play in inter-State relations, and thus safeguarding peace. The theory that world peace and security depend on the so-called balance of power or balance of terror is constantly belied by the facts, and Is of its very nature dangerous.
86. The giant strides made by modern science and technology, whose progress is unfortunately being applied mainly in the military sphere, as the recent revival of the nuclear armaments race only serves to prove, makes any balance of power a permanently fragile and precarious thing. Hence mankind needs genuine peace based on disarmament, not just the absence of war based on deterrent force.
87. While working towards the long-term goal of general disarmament, Romania at the same time favours the implementation of partial measures of disarmament designed to help to bring about an easing of tension and a lessening of the danger of nuclear war.
88. A ban on the use of nuclear weapons would unquestionably be an important step towards the elimination of such weapons. The Romanian delegation, which has always advocated such a measure, once again at this session supports the efforts to conclude a convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. Such a convention would have a positive effect on the problem of disarmament as a whole and a beneficial influence on the efforts to prevent another war. Another desirable measure would be the establishment of nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world. My delegation associates itself with the appreciation expressed here for the progress achieved by the Latin American States in promoting the idea of denuclearized zones through the conclusion of a Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America.
89. With regard to the question of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the Romanian delegation considers that a non-proliferation treaty should cover the following points: it should constitute an integral part of a system of measures designed to lead up to the elimination of nuclear weapons; it should provide equal safeguards for the security of all States, large or small, nuclear or non-nuclear; it should place no limits on the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes by any nation, but on the contrary it should grant all States, on an equal footing and without any discrimination whatever, unlimited rights and opportunities to carry out research in this field, and to use the achievements of nuclear science to further their peaceful development; finally, it should institute a precise and equitable system of control, based on the principle of the equality of States, to which all countries would be equally subject and which should leave no loop-hole for interference in the internal affairs of other States. Its ultimate goal would be to get rid of the present division of the world into nuclear and nonnuclear countries, to strengthen the principle of State equality, and positively to reduce the danger of war.
90. Thus conceived, the treaty would constitute an important step along the road to general disarmament, and would have the effect of releasing an immense flood of material resources and mental energies vital to the achievement of economic and social progress throughout the world.
91. The world economic situation today furnishes another eloquent example of the extent to which the principle of equality comes into conflict with the hard fact of the widening gap between national levels of development. One aspect of this which is especially topical is the discrepancy in the sphere of science and technology which threatens to confront the society of tomorrow with a situation where the various States are poles apart in their stage of development. Reference has been made here quite rightly to the desirability for all countries to be able to take advantage, on an equal footing and without discrimination, of the achievements of modern science and technology and to develop an up-to-date economy of their own, without which progress Is an illusion and independence a fiction.
92. Year after year the debates in this Assembly have brought into the foreground a phenomenon which has serious repercussions at the world level, namely the Increasing disparity between the economies of the various countries as a result of the long period of colonial domination, of relations founded on the exploitation of the weaker countries by the more powerful ones. The widening of the economic gap engenders new forms of dependency at the international level and at the same time encourages neo-colonialist practices which infringe the principle of equality of rights of States. Preliminary studies and statistics indicate that at the present rate of development the most powerful States will be even more powerful in the future, while the weaker ones will fall still farther behind.
93. We have at our disposal a vast institutional network of an economic type. The effectiveness of international machinery and instruments in the sphere of development may be judged on the basis of a reliable criterion — the contribution they make towards narrowing the present gap between the economies of the various countries. It must be admitted that the results are not yet satisfactory, one reason being the inequitable character of the present trade mechanisms, which regularly put the developing countries at a disadvantage. The close interdependence between economic and political phenomena is prompting the international community to make concerted efforts to devise new machinery for international relations In the financial, commercial, technical and scientific fields, so that each individual country can participate on an equitable basis in the world division of labour and find in international co-operation support for its own efforts to make the best of its national resources. We express the hope that the forthcoming Conference on Trade and Development will help to establish economic relations on bases advantageous to all countries. Viewed from this angle, international endeavour appears in a new light, that of strengthening the equality of rights of States.
94. If it is to contribute as it ought towards solving the problems of the contemporary world In regard to the preservation of peace and international co-operation, the United Nations will have to adapt itself to the changes which have taken place in the world. In this connexion the primary issue is the application of the principle of universality.
95. Events themselves demonstrate that the major International problems cannot be settled by ignoring the People's Republic of China and other States now excluded from the international organizations; and this is why Romania, in conjunction with other countries, has requested the inclusion in the agenda of the present session of the question of restoring the legitimate rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations [A/6831] and removing of the emissaries of Chiang Kai-shek from the Organization. We feel that the time has come to regularize a situation which is detrimental to the fundamental interests of the United Nations, to peace and to international security.
96. Romania likewise supports the request by the German Democratic Republic to become a Member of the United Nations. In our opinion, the admission of the two German States to the Organization would help it to achieve universality and promote peace and international security.
97. In our concern to strengthen the Organization we stress once again the need to dissolve the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea and the urgent call for the withdrawal of the foreign troops now stationed In South Korea under the flag of the United Nations.
98. We also believe that the United Nations should play a more effective part In removing the last vestiges of the colonial system and of racial discrimination, with a view to the speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
99. Finally, we should like to point out the significance of a less spectacular activity carried out under the auspices of the Organization, namely the codification of the principles of international law. Any progress in this direction is calculated to help to reduce the element of the arbitrary in international relations and to promote equal rights and respect for the rule of law. This idea is also the basis of the anxiety to speed up the work of defining aggression, a problem which was on the agenda of international organizations even before the Second World War. Like the Soviet delegation which sponsored this item [A/6833], the Romanian delegation favours a more urgent approach to the definition of aggression, particularly since Romania, as a signatory of the London Convention of 1933, has shown an unflagging interest in the definition of aggression.100. The principles governing international relations have made steady progress throughout history. Fifty years after the great socialist October Revolution, an event which ushered in a new era in the development of contemporary society, life as we know it puts the seal on the eloquent appeal issued at that time for a world freed from the spectre of war, a world blossoming in the atmosphere of friendly co-operation among nations carried on through open diplomatic relations, with the participation of all, and respecting the principles of non-interference and the equal rights of States.
101. The consolidation of these principles presupposes that all States by their conduct will keep the commandments of international ethics, the primary source of common responsibility in a world bound together by a host of mutual interests.
102. The United Nations has been and continues to be a forum where these principles, even though sorely tried at times, are being constantly applied in the interests of peace and security, towards which all peoples strive with the same eagerness.