42. Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that I offer you, on behalf of my delegation and in the name of the Chairman and members of the National Reformation Council and the people of Sierra Leone, our sincere congratulations on your election as President of the twenty-second session of the General Assembly.
43. Your election is indicative of the confidence which the Members of this Assembly have in your ability to discharge the duties of your high office. It also marks an important milestone in the history of this Organization, As the first representative of a socialist State from Eastern Europe to fill the office of President of this Assembly, your election not only augurs well for the peaceful coexistence of conflicting ideologies within the framework of the Organization, but it is also a warm tribute to your great country, which in its years of membership of this World Assembly has contributed so much towards universal peace and progress.
44. With your wide and varied experience, both within the United Nations and in the service of your country, we are confident that you will successfully direct the proceedings of this session.
45. No one who followed the work of the last session can fail to appreciate the invaluable services which Ambassador Pazhwak, your distinguished predecessor, has rendered to this Organization. The last year has been a difficult period involving not only the regular session but also two special sessions. There were difficult issues before the Assembly, and the skilful manner in which Ambassador Pazhwak conducted the proceedings is adequate testimony to his stature as an international statesman.
46. The Secretary-General has already presented his Annual Report on the Work of the Organization [A/6710]. We share his concern that much progress has not been made in improving the international political situation, and it is even more disappointing, as he himself has indicated [see A/6701/Add.1, para. 1] that the political situation has in fact deteriorated considerably. I shall deal presently with some of the various issues which have been highlighted in his report in the course of my statement. Before doing so, however, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his untiring effort in the cause of peace.
47. One of the main purposes of the United Nations is to maintain international peace and security. We are pledged to take effective collective measures to remove all threats to world peace and, in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, to settle all disputes by peaceful means. It is a measure of the General Assembly's awareness of these principles that during Its twenty-first session no fewer than ten resolutions were passed in an attempt to seek ways and means of realizing the ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It is, however, almost meaningless for us to talk of peace or expect its fulfilment, unless effective steps are taken towards general and complete disarmament. We are heartened to note that some progress has been made by the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, and we hope that this progress will soon be translated into the concrete results envisaged in General Assembly resolution 2162 (XXI). We welcome the draft treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and we congratulate both the Soviet Union and the United States of America which presented the joint draft. We also urge both Powers to continue their co-operative efforts until agreement is reached on the principal provisions dealing with safeguards. We appeal to all nuclear Powers and their allies both inside and outside the Conference of the Eighteen- Nation Committee on Disarmament to collaborate in the efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons.
48. At this stage, we must again record our conviction that no negotiation on disarmament can hope to succeed when one of the world's nuclear Powers, representing a quarter of the earth's population, is systematically denied representation in the Organization which bears the sacred responsibility for preserving peace. We therefore urge that every effort be made to bring the People's Republic of China into the United Nations, where we believe its vast resources can be utilized in the cause of peace. At the same time, my Government will not support any steps taken towards the expulsion of the Republic of China.
49. The continued escalation of the Viet-Nam conflict despite efforts by our Secretary-General constitutes the greatest danger to world peace. My Government is of the opinion that the time has come for this grave question to be removed from the battle-field to the conference table, The misery and suffering inflicted in Viet-Nam demand that all parties to the conflict cease hostilities and divert their resources and energies towards a peaceful solution.
50. For the third time in two decades there has been a full scale war in the Middle East and, but for the timely Intervention of the Security Council which took prompt cease-fire action, the most recent one would still have been in progress. The situation in the Middle East is not only well documented, but it has been discussed in almost every session of the Assembly. The fifth emergency special session was devoted entirely to a discussion of the basic issues in that area. But notwithstanding the long debates and the various resolutions which were adopted, there is still the threat of war. It has been suggested that the parties to the dispute should themselves resolve their differences and try to effect a peaceful settlement. Since such a settlement has not been effected, it is incumbent on this Organization to take appropriate and concerted action in order to establish a just and lasting peace.
51. The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his Annual Report, has indicated certain measures which should be taken to effect a lasting peace [see A/6701/ Add.1, paras. 48-51], The various delegations which have addressed this Assembly have dealt with these measures with varying degrees of emphasis. It is not my intention to reiterate these measures. There are, however, two principles which, in the opinion of my Government, are fundamental to any lasting settlement of the dispute. First, the occupation by military force of the territory of one State by another is a contravention of the provisions of the Charter. Secondly, it is the right of every State to exist in security within its own borders.
52. Apart from these principles, there are other issues involved. There are, for example, the problem of the Palestinian refugees, the question of the right of innocent maritime passage, and the readiness with which certain major Powers have been supplying arms to the parties to the dispute. It is the ardent wish of my Government that all the major Powers will refrain from giving any form of military assistance to the parties. We also express the hope that the parties to the dispute will be more flexible in their position in order to facilitate a mutually acceptable solution.
53. The recent crisis in the Middle East has emphasized more than ever the need for effective peace-keeping machinery within the United Nations. In fact, it would be true to say that peace-keeping is a fundamental reason for the establishment of this Organization and, in a world of increasing tensions, the greatest justification for its continued existence. Indeed, it should be a constant rebuke to humanity that after many years of experimentation we are still without a universally acceptable formula for effective peace-keeping. It is accepted that there are conflicting views as to the organ responsible for peace-keeping operations. My Government's opinion has always been that, although the Security Council has primary responsibility for peace-keeping operations, this does not necessarily mean that the Security Council has exclusive responsibility in this matter.
54. Nevertheless, having considered the role which the General Assembly was called upon to play in the Middle East crisis during the fifth emergency special session, my Government sees a ray of hope about overcoming the impasse, We are therefore optimistic that further success will be achieved in the near future. To this end we support the recommendation of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations that its mandate should be renewed to enable it to continue exploring ways and means of carrying out and financing peace-keeping operations. We must commend that Committee for its persistent endeavour to resolve the problems involved, in spite of recurring frustrations.
55. Now, more than ever, with the conflict in South East Asia expanding into dangerous proportions, with the uneasy truce in the Middle East in constant danger of collapse, with the ugly spectre of racial confrontation threatening the whole of southern Africa, effective peace-keeping by the United Nations is more than a mere political expedience. It is a solemn obligation. However, until all the concomitant problems are satisfactorily resolved, my Government hopes that every Member State will consider itself committed to providing voluntarily, within the limits of its resources, the facilities, services and finances necessary for peace-keeping operations within the framework of the Charter. My Government is also optimistic that all the great Powers will voluntarily make additional substantial contributions so that the financial position of the United Nations will be considerably improved.
56. Another important topic on which my delegation intends to comment is the refugee problem. My Government is concerned about the growing proportions which this problem is assuming with the result that it appears to be a permanent feature of the international scene. In Africa alone, in 1966, a total of 630,000 refugees qualified for assistance from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The statistics on the global scene are even more frightening and need no repetition. My Government is aware of the considerable complexity of the refugee problem which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is approaching squarely and boldly. My Government views with satisfaction the time, energy, and other resources which the High Commissioner and his staff are devoting to this problem.
57. Yet another great danger to world peace persists on the African continent. I refer to the policy of racial segregation, racial oppression and exploitation known as apartheid. This offensive practice has engaged the attention of this Organization for many years. We note with distress that, in spite of the full and comprehensive study of this problem by the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa and other international organizations, and in spite of the loud condemnation of this policy by various Governments, this hateful system continues to abide with us because some nations are reluctant to take effective measures to bring South Africa to reason.
58. In its resolution 2202 (XXI) the Assembly again appealed to all States to comply with the Security Council decisions on an arms embargo against South Africa, and it also drew the attention of countries to their economic collaboration with South Africa, which, in strengthening the hand of those who maintain the apartheid system, has aggravated the danger of a violent racial conflict in the area.
59. Among the colonial questions that will be engaging the attention of this Assembly, I should like to single out for particular mention three which constitute a grave threat to international peace and security. I refer to the situation in Rhodesia, the Territories under Portuguese administration, and South West Africa. Our reference to only these three questions does not in any way minimize the seriousness which my Government attaches to the colonial problem in general, nor does it indicate any lack of concern over the remaining territories still under colonial domination. On the contrary, our intention is to underline the gravity and the dangerous nature of the problem in these particular areas.
60. Every member of this Assembly must be fully aware of the importance of the question of South West Africa. During its twenty-first session, faced with a decision of the International Court of Justice which, by implication, transferred the problem of South West Africa from the legal to the political sphere, this Assembly rose to the challenge and decided to assume direct responsibility for the administration of that Territory. International concern was again evident at the fifth special session of the General Assembly, in which this problem was fully discussed. It is distressing to note that little progress has been made in implementing resolution 2145 (XXI) in so far as it relates to the administration of the Territory.
61. Having assumed direct responsibility for that administration, the United Nations is committed to ensuring that South Africa ceases to exercise any authority over the Territory. In the light of the divergent approaches to the problem during the special session of the General Assembly, we are compelled to appeal to all Member States, and especially the great Powers, to co-operate In ensuring the full and speedy implementation of resolution 2145 (XXI) and resolution 2248 (S-V) adopted by the Assembly at its special session.
62. We note with considerable dismay that, in spite of the action already taken by the General Assembly, South Africa continues to exercise authority over the Territory, spreading its policy of apartheid and oppressing the inhabitants of this Non-Self- Governing Territory. The creation of Ovamboland as a self-governing entity within South West Africa is but the first step in the deliberate fragmentation of the Territory in order to facilitate its domination and eventual annexation by South Africa. These measures must therefore be resisted most vigorously.
63. In the case of Southern Rhodesia, this Assembly is again confronted with an instance of flagrant defiance not only of its authority but of the collective conscience of mankind. In spite of the near unanimity with which the Assembly condemned the illegal declaration by Ian Smith, in spite of the unanimity with which the Security Council decided to impose certain sanctions on Rhodesia and thus bring an end to the illegal situation, lack of support by some Members of this Organization who are sitting here with us has made it possible for the Smith regime to survive. We have noted with dismay the United Kingdom delegation's statement before the Assembly [1567th meeting] that the British Government does not intend to use force in solving the question of Rhodesia or to be involved in an economic war with South Africa, It is the view of my Government that sanctions should not only be extended but made mandatory, with a view to the complete isolation of this rebellious regime. Indeed, my Government has always maintained and continues to believe that only the use of force will crush the Smith regime.
64. Of equal concern to us is the Portuguese colonial policy, which has not shown any sign of change since this Assembly adopted resolution 1514 (XV). We reject the claim put forward by Portugal that any territory in Africa forms an integral part of metropolitan Portugal and we unequivocally condemn the colonial war with which Portugal is striving to support this claim.
65. In 1963 my Government, together with those of Liberia, Madagascar and Tunisia, acting under a mandate from the Organization of African Unity, put the case against Portuguese colonialism before the Security Council. Our aim was to ensure that the people of Angola, Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea might be enabled to determine for themselves the political, social and economic future of their territories at the earliest possible date. My Government is still of the conviction that the people of Portuguese colonial territories should be given a chance to exercise freely their right to self-determination and independence. However, this goal can be achieved only if all Member States show sufficient concern and bring their influence to bear on Portugal by breaking off all diplomatic and trade relations with it. We make this appeal particularly to the allies of Portugal, on which it depends for the means to prosecute its genocidal colonial war. We urge them as members of the Security Council, which has a great responsibility for the restoration of peace in these territories, to lend us their invaluable support in ending the death and destruction in Portuguese colonial territories and in working for their immediate decolonization.
66. My Government has noted with satisfaction the progress which has been made by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in "the elaboration of an agreement on liability for damages caused by the launching of objects into outer space and an agreement on assistance to and return of astronauts and space vehicles'1 [resolution 2222 (XXI), para. 4. (a)]. The Government and people of Sierra Leone would like to remember and also to record their appreciation of all those who have given not only their talents but in some cases their lives to this all-important project. It is but fitting, at this stage, that I should tender my country's sympathy to the United States of America and the Soviet Union for the tragic loss sustained in the deaths of their astronauts. My Government firmly believes in the peaceful future of space discovery. It is our hope that international space effort will continue to be employed for peaceful uses. Considerations such as these, and more, have impelled my Government to become a signatory to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies [see resolution 2222 (XXI), annex]. On humanitarian and other grounds, my delegation would like to urge the Committee to bring about the full implementation of resolution 2222 (XXI) at an early date.
67. My Government appreciates the achievements carried out in space technology. The growth of communications by means of satellites, the Indian report on an experiment involving the use of satellites for disseminating information concerning agricultural methods and population control and the planned UNESCO pilot programme in mass communication by means of satellites [see A/6804, annex II, paras, 20 and 21] all concern areas of space technology in which my Government is taking an increasing interest. It is for these reasons that we look forward to the United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, scheduled to be held at Vienna in August 1968 [see resolution 2250 (S-V)].
68. With a world today torn by numerous conflicts and where the global situation continues to be tense, my Government appreciates the achievements of the International Law Commission. The seventy-five draft articles proposed by the Commission for a convention on the law of treaties and its work on the international law relating to special missions represent a very important step in the codification and progressive development of international law and emphasize its proper place in the activities of the United Nations.
69. I have left the economic problems to be dealt with last because of the great importance my Government attaches to this aspect of the work of the United Nations. The world's problems are to a large extent economic and social, and until we can find satisfactory solutions to these problems our search for a lasting peace will be futile. Members of this Assembly, therefore, have a great part to play in this task.
70. We recognize the work the United Nations and its specialized agencies, the World Bank Group and the regional economic commissions have done in this respect. However, there is still much more to be done to raise the standard of living in less-developed areas so as to achieve an over-all increase in the rate of progress in the world.
71. The fact that the targets set for the current United Nations Development Decade still have to be reached is indicative of the insufficient progress so far achieved. Admittedly, the responsibility for meeting this deficiency lies partly on the developing countries, partly on the developed countries, and to a very large extent on the pattern of international trade, which so badly needs to be regulated to the greater advantage of the developing countries. In this respect, Sierra Leone is of the opinion that there is still room for improvement in the agreement reached at the Kennedy Hound trade negotiations, so as to meet the needs of developing countries. The developed countries, no doubt, have an international duty to help the developing countries increase their trade if the ever-increasing gap between the "haves" and the "have-nots" is to be reduced. It is therefore our hope that the second United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to be held at New Delhi- more aptly described by the Secretary-General as the "New Delhi Round" [see A/6701/Add.1, para. 74] — will provide useful solutions to the trade problems of the developing countries. In this respect, we are fully aware of the importance of providing, through increased trade, the much-needed foreign exchange which is so vital to development. My Government is optimistic that the developed countries, conscious of the mutual and international benefits to be derived if the developing countries are afforded the opportunity of increasing their trade, will spare no effort in assisting them by reducing and removing all obstacles thereto. By this means, the world will be a happier place for all mankind. The miseries of disease and ignorance will be eradicated, as developing countries will have the means to improve their health, educational facilities and standards of living. It is a well-known fact that the flow of multilateral and bilateral aid is showing signs of stagnation, while the already affluent countries continue to grow richer. This is the case in spite of the effort of the United Nations to link these two significant elements.
72. The outlook for the world's food situation is somewhat disquieting. My Government is therefore greatly concerned about agricultural development as a means of increasing the world's food supply. To achieve a balanced growth of the economy of a country, industrial development should go hand in hand with agricultural development. We therefore support the newly-formed United Nation Industrial Development Organization in the firm belief that it will achieve signal success.
73. We reaffirm our support for the Organization of African Unity and trust that there will be increasing co-operation between that Organization and the United Nations.
74. Let us all rededicate ourselves to the ideals enshrined in the Charter of this Organization. We are confident that under your leadership, Mr. President, this twenty-second session of the General Assembly will succeed in reducing tensions in all parts of the world and will make an effective contribution towards the improvement of the living standard of mankind.
