1. Comrade President, please accept our sincere congratulations on this occasion when you, a representative of a fraternal socialist nation, have been elected President of the United Nations General Assembly. We are confident that you will honourably discharge the strenuous duties of this high and responsible office. I am also pleased to be able to thank Ambassador Pazhwak for the great efforts and skill he displayed during the fruitful proceedings of the last three sessions of the General Assembly.
2. Many delegations that have spoken before me have noted with legitimate concern that tension in the world has increased considerably of late. This is indeed true. If the twenty-first session of the General Assembly was held in difficult circumstances, the present Assembly has to work in an atmosphere of even greater International complications resulting from the continued escalation of the war in Viet-Nam and Israel's aggression against the Arab States.
3. In International relations in the current year there have been numerous acts of interference in the domestic affairs of independent countries and peoples, as well as various kinds of subversive activities against their territorial integrity and sovereignty. There is a continual increase in the arms race, which absorbs tremendous material resources at a time when hundreds of millions of people on our planet are deprived of the most elementary living conditions. Efforts are being made to intensify the activities of aggressive blocs and alliances.
4. That adventurist and militarist policy is countered by the policy of peace and international security pursued by socialist and other peace-loving countries.
5. The policy of peace proceeds from the recognition of the new objective natural laws which emerged as a result of the victorious Great October Socialist Revolution. The world is moving along the trail blazed by that Revolution in 1917. Attempts by the imperialist forces to hamper or side-track this development away from the revolutionary process cannot succeed and are doomed to failure. The forces that rejuvenate the world are invincible. We wish to remind once more of that fact all those who endeavour here to justify acts of aggression. The new system of public life has become firmly established on our planet.
6. The foreign policy of the socialist society, which is based on the principles of peace, equality and self- determination of peoples, exerts an ever-greater determining influence on the international situation. And however dark may be the clouds hanging over the international horizon of today, we are deeply convinced that the forces of peace will triumph over those of aggression. That is the essential meaning of the profound processes which determine the revolution of contemporary history.
7. The most serious source of international tension which threatens world peace is the United States aggression in Viet-Nam. The criminal war, waged at the beginning mostly by the army of the Saigon puppets, has long since developed into a war of annihilation waged by the United States against the freedom-loving people of that small nation in Asia.
8. The United States has despatched huge land, naval and air forces to suppress the national liberation movement of the Viet-Namese people. The United States is criminally bombing the territory of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and carrying out large-scale military operations in South Viet-Nam, exterminating peaceful populations.
9. Previously the United States ruling circles camouflaged their actions by talking of certain limited police actions which, allegedly, did not harm the country's peaceful population, but today the United States brass is no longer concealing the fact that the objective of the war is total annihilation, The Commander-in- Chief of the American armed forces in Viet-Nam openly declares that the United States will simply go on bleeding the North Viet-Namese white until Hanoi realizes that the country has become so weak that this will be a national catastrophe for a number of generations to come.
10. While waging a war of annihilation against the Viet-Namese people and trying to bring that people to its knees, the United States Government is trying to persuade world public opinion that its sole concern is to seek peace in Viet-Nam. This year we are again hearing it said here that all the United States has in mind is the restoration of peace in Viet-Nam, Mr. Goldberg stated:"... this conflict can and should be ended by a political situation...A military solution is not the answer." [1562nd meeting, para. 4.]
11. What is it that prevents the United States from translating its peace-loving declarations into reality? It is evident to anyone that peace in Viet-Nam can be achieved only as a result of the withdrawal of the aggressor, and this depends exclusively on the United States. It is not the Viet-Namese troops that are on the territory of the United States but the American armed forces that wage war in Viet-Nam, No Viet-Namese planes are raiding the territory of the United States, but American air pirates are bombing towns and villages of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.
12. Pham Van Dong, Head of Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, declared on 31 August 1967, only a month ago, that
"if the American side really wishes to negotiate, it must, in the first place, unconditionally stop bombings and all other military activities against the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.”
13. The United States militarists, however, prefer to follow a different course. The United States Government is heading for a further escalation of the war. The United States armed forces are mining rivers of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, shelling its territory from warships and expanding aerial bombardment.
14. On the eve of the twenty-second session of the General Assembly the United States, for the first time during the hostilities, bombed the port of Campha and other populated areas of Viet-Nam.
15. Is not this the way to achieve a military solution of the Viet-Nam problem and are not the United States Government's pronouncements about apolitical solution and a peaceful settlement of the Viet-Namese question merely demagoguery?
16. It is incumbent upon each responsible Government to realize fully the perils of the present United States policy, which is setting the world on a dangerous course, and to condemn the aggression and demand that an end be put to it unconditionally. In such a situation there cannot be any unconcerned onlookers, for United States aggression in Viet-Nam endangers peace throughout the world. One should not forget that every new step taken by the United States in escalating the war in Viet-Nam will inevitably entail retaliatory measures.
17. The Soviet Union and other socialist countries are on the side of the Viet-Namese people and support their heroic struggle. The Ukrainian people, together with the other peoples of the Soviet Union, is rendering all forms of assistance to the people of Viet-Nam, We emphatically condemn the American aggression and demand that it be stopped immediately.
18. Another grave danger to peace is Israel’s aggression against Arab countries. The situation in the Middle East continues to cause great anxiety. The crux of the problem is this: unless the consequences of the Israel aggression are eliminated there will be no lasting peace in that part of the globe.
19. At the emergency special session of the General Assembly the overwhelming majority of Member States of the United Nations condemned the aggressor and supported the legitimate rights and interests of the Arab countries and the restoration and consolidation of peace in the Middle East. Recent events have shown that Israel is flagrantly violating the resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly by committing new acts of provocation against Arab nations and shelling towns in the Suez Canal area and in the territory of Jordan.
20. Israel is arrogantly flouting the General Assembly resolutions [2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)] which denounce the annexation of Jerusalem and call upon it
”... to rescind all the measures taken and immediately to refrain from taking actions which would change the status of Jerusalem".
Every day brings new instances of Israel’s provocative actions in Jerusalem.
21. The aggressors are also seeking to retain other seized areas of the Arab States. Having expelled the indigenous Arab population from the occupied territories and having plundered their properties, the Israel authorities are now taking steps to settle their own citizens in those territories. Not long ago Premier Eshkol announced to the world that the Suez Canal was a natural boundary of the State of Israel.
22. In putting forward such outrageous territorial claims the aggressors even have the audacity to lecture the United Nations, Recently we witnessed in the General Assembly how the Foreign Minister of Israel tried to dictate to other States and to the United Nations itself what they should and should not do.
23. All this indicates that Israel is not only not renouncing its schemes of conquest but is continuing to stir up tensions in the Middle East. That is why the demand for an immediate withdrawal of the Israel invaders from the Arab territories still remains the main issue at this stage.
24. The United Nations cannot condone any encroachment upon the territorial integrity and freedom of sovereign States. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic has supported and will support the legitimate rights and interests of the Arab peoples and will continue to speak out in favour of the restoration and consolidation of peace in the Middle East.
25. Mr. Shcherbitsky, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Ukrainian SSR, speaking at the emergency special session of the General Assembly, stated:
"Our people associates itself with those who resolutely condemn Israel aggression and who demand an unconditional cessation of such aggression and a reparation of all its consequences... We consider... that the United Nations must take a firm stand for the elimination of aggression and of all its consequence”. [1532nd meeting, paras. 19 and 42.] 26. Recent events show how the imperialists try to impose their will upon freedom-loving peoples by force of arms and to subject them to their domination. In this connexion the apologists of aggression try to find "new" justifications for their right to intervene. Such an attempt was made recently by Mr. Brzezinski, member of the Policy Planning Council of the State Department of the United States. In his statement at the conference on foreign policy matters held in Washington in May 1967, he stated, inter alia:"Under what conditions should we or should we not intervene? It is extraordinarily difficult to define clear-cut criteria; but as a broad generalization, it might be said that intervention is justified whenever its absence will create regional instability of expanding proportions. It has to be judged largely on its international merits and not in terms of specific domestic consequences within individual States. It is that distinction which justifies intervention — it is that distinction which warrants our involvement today in the effort to create regional stability in South-East Asia."
27. What do people like Brzezinski care for the United Nations Charter or the United Nations Declaration on the inadmissibility of interference? As soon as they need to "justify" their role as world gendarme a new doctrine emerges, and this time it is the doctrine of "regional stability".
28. All these facts once again convince us that in the present circumstances, when local aggressive actions threaten to develop into much more serious conflicts and when the independence and sovereignty of States are Increasingly being exposed to new, dangerous blows, energetic and concerted action on the part of all peace-loving forces is needed more than ever before.
29. It is in this light that we are considering the proposal of the Soviet delegation on expediting the elaboration of definition of aggression [A/6833]. This problem has remained unsolved up till now, and the blame for that rests entirely with those Western Powers that find it convenient to have no definition of aggression, since that makes it easier for them to unleash it.
30. The current session of the General Assembly should devote special attention to the question of the definition of aggression. The elaboration of a precise and specific definition of aggression will make it easier to prevent aggression, to render assistance to its victims and to defend their legitimate rights and interests. Our delegation will give every support to the proposal to expedite the elaboration of a definition of aggression.
31. In the present circumstances, when international tension is not diminishing but, on the contrary, is steadily mounting as a result of the activities of aggressive forces, the solution of the disarmament problem assumes ever greater importance. The dialectics of the development of present-day international relations are such that a slackening of the struggle of peace-loving peoples for disarmament will leave the most aggressive circles free to act. The persistent struggle of all peoples for disarmament, on the other hand, will seriously limit the possibility of manoeuvring for the warmongers.
32. However great the difficulties on the path to disarmament may be, we should spare no effort to attain understanding on this extremely important question.
33. The solution of the problem of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons would be an important step towards the cessation of the arms race. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic notes with satisfaction that the negotiations on the conclusion of a treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons have reached their final stage.
34. We have before us now a specific document on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons which is the result of the consistent efforts of the Soviet Union and other socialist States, and of all the peace-loving forces fighting against the nuclear threat and for international security.
35. The main task of the treaty is to exclude any possibility of a proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world. This task, which is in full conformity with General Assembly decisions, particularly with resolution 2028 (XX), acquires special urgency now in connexion with the attempts by the West German revanchists to gain access to nuclear weapons, which they need in order to carry out their plans for a revision of the post-war boundaries of Europe.
36. It is not a mere coincidence that the prospect of the conclusion of a treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons has led Bonn to advance all kinds of pre-conditions and reservations.
37. The peoples of the whole world are looking forward to the signing of the treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons because they consider it to be a valuable contribution to the solution of the problem of general and complete disarmament.
38. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic believes that efforts to prevent the danger of nuclear war should also be undertaken in other directions. In this respect we completely support the proposal made by the Soviet delegation for the conclusion of a convention on the prohibition of nuclear weapons (A/6834). We are convinced that the conclusion of such a convention would mark an important step towards the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons and would constitute an effective obstacle to the unleashing of a nuclear missile war.
39. A solution of the question of prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons is long overdue. The idea of prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons has gained the widespread support of the majority of States Members of the United Nations. It was six years ago that, on the initiative of Ethiopia and other African and Asian States, and with the active support of the socialist countries, the sixteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly adopted the well- known Declaration on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons [resolution 1653 (XVI)].
40. The Declaration clearly states that "the use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons is contrary to the spirit, letter and aims of the United Nations and, as such, a direct violation of the Charter of the United Nations". This recommendation expresses the firm will of the peoples to prohibit the use of nuclear weapons, and now the task is to give it the form of specific contractual obligations by States, through the elaboration and conclusion of an international convention to that end.
41. The draft convention proposed by the Soviet delegation fully meets this requirement. In order finally to prohibit the use of nuclear weapons, there must, of course, in the first place be the will to do so on the part of the nuclear States and all other States. The peoples of the world also expect from us a solution of this important question of our day.
42. The history of the first half of the twentieth century has taught mankind to follow closely developments on the continent of Europe, where two world wars have originated.
43. The peoples of the Soviet Union, including the Ukrainian people, suffered great losses in the Second World War; we paid a high price for our victory over the Hitlerite hordes. Our vital interest in the maintenance of European security is therefore fully understandable. The decisive factors in this respect are to ensure the stability of the existing frontiers in Europe and to prevent the revanchist forces from acquiring nuclear weapons.
44. Recently, certain people in the West have been advocating the idea of the so-called "new Eastern policy” which is allegedly being pursued by the present Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. That country’s ruling circles even complain that the "new" policy is being disregarded and ignored in the East.
45. The facts, however, convincingly prove that the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany remains essentially unchanged: it is a policy of revenge, militarism, non-recognition of the real situation in Europe and encroachment on the territories of other States and nations, including the territory of the German Democratic Republic.
46. If Bonn really wishes to pursue a constructive policy it should pass from illusory plans to real ones, and first of all it should renounce its claims to territories of other States. The problem of the frontiers in Europe has been solved, and no revision can be possible. The German Democratic Republic exists as an independent, peace-loving State, beneficially influencing the consolidation of peace in Europe.
47. In pursuing a policy of peace and businesslike co-operation, the European socialist countries, including the German Democratic Republic, are widening the sphere of application of the principles of peaceful coexistence and promoting the solution of the problems of European and general collective security. In this respect, constructive proposals are contained in the Declaration on Strengthening Peace and Security in Europe, adopted at the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the member States of the Warsaw Treaty and in the Declaration of the European Communist and Workers’ Parties adopted in April 1967 at the conference in Karlovy Vary. 48. The United Nations, having adopted its historical 1960 Declaration [resolution 1514 (XV)] on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, pronounced an emphatic "no" to colonialism. In the process of implementation of this Declaration a crushing blow was inflicted on colonialism, and considerable credit for that goes to the United Nations.
49. Nevertheless, millions of people are still living under conditions of colonial slavery. One of the largest bulwarks of colonialism is in the southern part of the African continent. There the "classical" colonialism of the Portuguese is closely interwoven with the ugly inhuman policy of apartheid and the racism of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia.
50. In spite of the fact that the General Assembly deprived South Africa of its mandate over South West Africa [2145 (XXI)], the racists still dominate that territory by force of arms. We believe that the rule of the Republic of South Africa in South West Africa must be immediately terminated, and this means the withdrawal of all armed and police forces, the abolition of the colonial state machinery and the transfer of power to the people of the country.
51. A situation fraught with danger to peace and security still exists in Southern Rhodesia, where a handful of racists seized power and established a regime of colonial terrorism. For two years London and Salisbury have shamelessly bargained over the interests and the very destiny of the people of Zimbabwe.
52. The General Assembly must demand that the administering Power put the resolutions on Southern Rhodesia into effect and grant freedom and independence to the long-suffering people of Zimbabwe.
53. The actions of the Portuguese colonialists have aroused the wrath and indignation of all people of goodwill throughout the world. The Lisbon rulers regard the modern world in the light of past centuries. They try to prove by force of arms their "right" to Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau) and other colonies. However, the resistance of the African patriots is growing and becoming stronger. The peoples of the Portuguese colonies are determined to struggle for freedom and independence until they achieve complete victory.
54. The flames of national liberation wars are leaping ever higher in the South of the Arabian Peninsula. The soil is burning under the feet of the British colonialists. They are being forced to leave Aden and South Arabia. But before leaving they are trying to preserve their domination, their economic and military positions in that region and to foist upon the people of Aden and South Arabia a puppet regime that would serve the interests of the British Crown. The United Nations should render to the peoples of Aden and South Arabia all possible assistance and support in their legitimate struggle for genuine freedom and independence.
55. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic supports all the decisions of the General Assembly aimed at the earliest elimination of the colonial regimes. We favour the immediate granting of independence to the peoples of colonial Territories.

56. There can he no doubt that the colonial regimes in the Republic of South Africa, the Portuguese colonies and Southern Rhodesia are holding out because of the economic, political and military assistance they receive from some NATO countries. The General Assembly has already determined that the support rendered by Western countries to colonialists is based on the interests of international monopolies.
57. The last General Assembly session, in its resolution 2189 (XXI), denounced the activities of foreign monopolies in the colonial countries and decided to include this question as a separate item on the agenda of its twenty-second session. The policy of colonialism and the interests of monopolies are two sides of the same coin. The economy of colonial countries is completely in the hands of monopolies and, because of this, takes on an evermore one-sided and ugly form.
58. The monopolies brutally exploit the labour of the indigenous population, pump out raw materials, paying next to nothing for them, and reap fabulous profits. The enterprises they have built remain foreign bodies in the colonies; profits flow abroad and are not used for the development of the economy of the colonial Territories.
59. The activities of the foreign monopolies in colonial Territories are a serious obstacle on the road to independence. That is why this session of the General Assembly must make its contribution towards the elimination of the domination of foreign monopolies in colonial countries.
60. The Assembly has much serious work to accomplish in the social and economic fields. The tremendous growth of productive forces, the unprecedented development of science, technology and culture, which are the characteristic features of the second half of the twentieth century, exist side by side with such terrible social evils as hunger, illiteracy, unemployment and extreme poverty.
61. Racists continue their arbitrary rule, the inhuman policy of apartheid is being put into effect, the rights of entire peoples are being trampled underfoot and fundamental freedoms and human rights are being flagrantly violated. All those questions have been repeatedly examined in various United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, and the reasons for the appearance and existence of these problems have been revealed. It is the duty of our Organization and of all States Members of the United Nations to seek the best possible solution to those problems.
62. During the twenty-two years of its existence the United Nations has devoted considerable attention to questions of economic development, and has taken many useful decisions leading to the consolidation of the national economies of developing countries through industrialization, democratic agrarian reforms, expansion of the State sector, training of national technical personnel and the creation of conditions for equal and mutually advantageous international trade.
63. However, despite all these decisions, the gap between the economies of developed and developing countries, instead of decreasing, is growing even wider. Though more than half the period of the United Nations Development Decade has passed, its tasks are still far from being fulfilled. Numerous important problems facing the developing nations remain unsolved.
64. The developing countries rightfully demand a revision of the existing system of international .economic relations. They are particularly concerned about discriminatory terms of trade and loans with strings attached; they experience great difficulties in finding funds to finance their development.
65. We have always considered that the main reason for the weakness of the position of developing nations in the world economic system and in international trade lies in the activities of monopolies, which stop at nothing in their endeavours to retain the favourable conditions they enjoy in their relations with developing countries.
66. Under such circumstances, in the view of our delegation, the United Nations must concentrate on the protection of the economic positions of developing countries. The current session must contribute to the safeguarding of the interests of developing nations and to the creation of the necessary conditions for their independent development.
67. Only one month separates us from a great date in the history of mankind — the fiftieth anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution, which was a turning-point also in the life of the Ukrainian people. The victorious course of that Revolution led to the establishment of Soviet rule in the Ukraine on 25 December 1917.
68. Side by side with other fraternal peoples, the Ukrainian people, inspired by the idea of social and national liberation, has won Its freedom, statehood and sovereignty; has created a republic, equal among equals in the mighty and indestructible Union of Soviet Republics. This is the source of happiness of the Ukrainian people, of its strength, glory and successes.
69. The road taken by the Ukrainian people over the past half-century has been one of heroic deeds, stern trials, tremendous creative work in all spheres of social, economic and cultural life. Soviet Ukraine today is a Republic with powerful industries, developed agriculture, and a high level of science and culture.
70. With a territory of less than 1 per cent of the world and a population amounting to 1.5 per cent of the population of the world, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic produces from 7 to 10 per cent of the world's output of pig iron, steel, iron ore and coal. In the production of many important items, including pig iron, steel, rolled metal, main-line diesel locomotives, sugar, iron ore and gas the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic occupies the first place in Europe.
71. These achievements of the Ukrainian people have been furthered by the cultural revolution which has multiplied the creative powers of a liberated people. There are about 100,000 scientific workers in the Ukraine and over 24,000 of them hove scientific degrees and titles. Fourteen million people study in different educational institutions, which means that almost every third citizen in the Ukraine is studying.

72. It is a matter of pride for us that among the names revered by and well known to mankind there are not a few names of Ukrainian scientists, writers and composers, whose creative work has promoted scientific and cultural progress in the world. The Ukrainian people, striving untiringly and systematically to maintain and strengthen peace and friendship among peoples, will continue to make their contribution to the development of world civilization.
73. On our way we have encountered difficulties and failures. We have had to live through the horrors of bloody wars. But we were victorious because we believed in the righteousness of our cause and today we view our future with the same confidence.
74. At the present period in international relations the United Nations is facing complex and important problems. In order to cope with them, all the Member States should, first of all, ensure strict observance of the provisions of the Charter and prevent their violation.
75. The United Nations has made a useful contribution to the strengthening of mutual understanding and co-operation among different States. Unfortunately, its agenda still retains such vestiges of the "cold war" as the co-called "Korean question". The occupation of South Korea by foreign, predominantly American, troops is the main obstacle to the peaceful reunification of that country.
76. That is why the Ukrainian delegation, together with the delegations of other socialist countries, proposed that the question of the withdrawal of all foreign occupation troops from South Korea should be included in the agenda of the present session of the General Assembly [A/6696 and Add.1-3]. The decision of the General Assembly on this question, together with the decision to abolish the notorious United Nations Commission on the Rehabilitation and Unification of Korea", would constitute a constructive step towards the achievement of unity for their long-suffering nation by the Korean people themselves.
77. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic still believes in the great importance of ensuring the universal character of this Organization. The continued enhancement of its role in the consolidation of world peace and security raises the urgent question of the admission of the German Democratic Republic to the United Nations, The German Democratic Republic's membership would expand the possibilities of the United Nations to work for peace and would increase its effectiveness. We also have no objections to the admission to membership in the United Nations of the other German State — the Federal Republic of Germany.
78. The Ukrainian SSR, proceeding from well-known considerations of principle, continues to believe that the legitimate rights of the Chinese People's Republic should be restored in this Organization and that the clique of Chiang Kai-shek should be expelled from all United Nations organs.
79. An intensive struggle between the forces of peace and the forces of aggression is still going on in the international arena. The partisans of peace realize ever more clearly that the elimination of the hotbeds of aggression is a task of paramount importance, It is the duty of all States to promote with all their strength and by every possible means the relaxation of international tensions, the strengthening of mutual trust in the relations among States and the creation of a healthier international atmosphere.