1.	The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR deems it necessary to give its views on a number of basic questions relating to the present international situation and on the work of the  United Nations during the period under review.
2.	My delegation agrees with the views expressed here that during the past year some significant events have  taken place which have brought about favourable; changes in the international situation and have led to  an appreciable relaxation of international tension, We consider that all the necessary conditions now exist to make the “spirit of Geneva” the basis for a constructive approach to the settlement of international problems in an atmosphere of mutual respect and trust. The peoples of the whole world attach great importance to this session of the General Assembly and expect from it decisions which will not only reinforce the “spirit of Geneva”, but will also help to reduce international tension further and to strengthen peace throughout the world. The chances of the peaceful settlement of controversial international problems are greater now than they I have ever been before. It is our duty to profit by this favourable atmosphere and to bring about a further relaxation of international tension.
3.	We have on our agenda some important and urgent questions which must be settled. To solve these problems successfully, the United' Nations must show in its deliberations that spirit of mutual understanding and [practical co-operation which led to the success of the talks between the Heads of Government of the four Powers at Geneva.
4.	Of the outstanding international problems which arouse the concern of the peoples of the whole world, none is more important at this time than that of the reduction of armaments and armed forces, the prohibition of the manufacture and use of atomic and hydrogen weapons and the elimination of the threat of a new war.
5.	The proposals which the Soviet Union submitted to the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission in London on 10 May 1955 [A/2979] contain a number of new provisions which would promote the settlement of some controversial questions in this field. These proposals are an important contribution to the cause of peace and open the way to a really practical settlement of the problem of disarmament,
6.	In this connexion, I should like to draw the attention of the General Assembly to the letter which Mr. Bulganin, the Head of the Soviet Government, sent to Mr. Eisenhower, the President of the United States of America, on 19 September 1955. In this letter, Mr. Bulganin stated that the work of the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission during the first few weeks had not yet yielded the expected results. He pointed out, moreover, the reasons for the situation which had arisen in the Sub-Committee, and the aspects of the disarmament problem on which agreement had already been reached among the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom and France. Mr. Bulganin stressed the fact that conditions for reaching agreement now existed, and that the present task was to make further efforts to find methods of breaking the deadlock in the disarmament problem, which was vitally important to the peoples of the USSR and the United States, as well as to the peoples of the whole world. Now it is not for the Soviet Union, but for the Western Powers to show a spirit of co-operation in this matter,
7.	We fully realize that the participants in the debates of the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the four Powers who are to meet at Geneva in October will have to make great efforts and overcome many difficulties in order to find a mutually acceptable settlement of the whole problem of disarmament. Nevertheless, the participants in these deliberations must find ways of narrowing further the gap between the positions of the great Powers; they must show great patience, wisdom and goodwill, and a desire to reach agreement; above all, they must show faith in the “spirit of Geneva”.
8.	We know full well that what the peoples of the world need is not an armaments race and the stockpiling of atomic and hydrogen bombs. They need peace and tranquillity; they want atomic energy, the greatest scientific discovery of the twentieth century, to be used for raising the standard of living of nations and for the further progress of mankind. The question whether atomic energy will be used for peace and construction or for war and destruction causes anxiety to all peoples, whether they live in America or in Europe, in Asia or in Africa. In this connexion, I should like to recall that the first scientific and technical conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy was held at Geneva in August this year. We can look upon this conference with General Assembly — Tenth Session — Plenary Meetings satisfaction; it discussed problems which are of concern to everybody, and it was brought about by the desire of the peoples to ensure the use of atomic energy in the interests of peace and progress.
9.	The peace-loving peoples of the world are urging ever more strongly that the manufacture and use of atomic and hydrogen weapons should be prohibited and that atomic energy should be used for peaceful purposes only. That is why we cannot delay the settlement of the problem of disarmament and of the prohibition of atomic weapons. The United Nations, which was set up as an instrument of peace, must make every effort to promote agreement among States and, above all, among the great Powers, on the question of the reduction of armaments and armed forces and the prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons. That is one of the most important tasks of the United Nations.
10.	The Soviet Union has recently taken practical steps to reduce its armed forces, and has given up military bases on the territories of other States. This initiative of the USSR was supported by the peoples’ democracies, which also reduced their armed forces to a considerable extent. All this will undoubtedly promote the settlement of the whole problem of disarmament and the strengthening of confidence among States. My delegation hopes that the noble example of the Soviet Union, which backs its words with deeds, will induce the Western Powers to take similar action.
11.	The sole purpose of the Soviet proposals on disarmament is to save mankind as a whole from a new war, to ease the strain in the relations between States and to free the peoples from the heavy burden of taxation which the armaments race places upon them. The Soviet proposals relate to the most vital questions which are causing profound concern to every nation. The Byelorussian people warmly welcomes the new proposals and practical measures of the Soviet Government with regard to disarmament, and expresses the hope that they will be supported by all the Member States of the United Nations.
12.	The Byelorussian people is also vitally concerned with the settlement of the important problem of securing peace in Europe, for, in the first half of this century alone, Byelorussia has twice been the victim of unprecedented destruction. We all know that both the first and second world wars began in Europe. We consider that stable and lasting peace in Europe can be achieved by the establishment of an effective system of collective security. That was the purpose of the proposal for the conclusion of a General European Treaty on Collective Security in Europe submitted by the Soviet Union delegation at the Geneva Conference. The establishment of a system of collective security in Europe would undoubtedly improve the international situation and would ensure normal living conditions for the peoples of Europe. The problem is to reach an agreed decision on this most important matter.
13.	We must also bear in mind the fact that the solution of the problem of European security and the settlement of the German question are indissolubly connected. As one of Germany’s closest neighbours, we cannot remain indifferent to the re-militarization of Western Germany which is now taking place in accordance with the Paris Agreements. The experience of history has taught us to be vigilant, not to sit with folded arms, but to take all the steps that we can to prevent the outbreak of another European war. We must remember that hostility and war between the Soviet and German peoples brought untold disaster, privation and suffering to millions of Soviet citizens and Germans in the last two world wars. As we know, this hostility and warfare served the purposes of aggressive circles in certain States, which were only too willing to take advantage of the clash between Germany and the Soviet Union.
14.	If we wish to maintain and strengthen peace, we should actively encourage the development and strengthening of friendly relations between the Soviet and German peoples, in the interests of world peace.
15.	The Soviet Union has made every effort to establish normal political, economic and cultural relations with the Federal Republic of Germany. Henceforth, the Soviet Union will have diplomatic and other relations with both the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany. This step taken by the Soviet Government will undoubtedly help to restore normal relations among the countries of Europe. The Byelorussian people welcomes and approves the measures taken by the Government of the USSR to establish normal relations with the Federal Republic of Germany. We also welcome the recently-concluded agreement on the relations between the USSR and the German Democratic Republic. This agreement will strengthen the friendly relations and close co-operation between the two States on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty, equal rights and non-interference in each other’s internal affairs.
16.	All these measures taken by the Soviet Government have a far-reaching international significance; they are in conformity with the interests of both the Soviet and the German peoples, they will contribute to the restoration of a united Germany as a peace-loving, democratic State, and they will help to ensure a further relaxation of international tension.
17.	With regard to Asia and Africa, it should be noted that in these areas too there are many extremely important questions which urgently require solution. These include the Korean question, the question of Indochina; the Moroccan and Algerian questions and the question of West Irian. These problems cannot be disregarded, and they must be solved in accordance with the national interest of the peoples of Asia and Africa, and in the interests of international peace and security.
18.	As in the past, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR advocates the peaceful settlement of the Korean question as quickly as possible. It is our duty to draw the General Assembly’s attention to the grave fact that the attitude of the Government of South Korea to the Korean problem accentuates the division of Korea and is fraught with the danger of another war. In August 1955, Syngman Rhee called for the dissolution of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission in Korea and expressed his intention of seizing areas to the north of the demarcation line. The United Nations should categorically condemn such statements and actions on the part of the Government of South Korea. The peoples of all countries are awaiting the peaceful settlement of the Korean question at the earliest possible time on the basis of the recognition of the national right of the Korean people to the re-unification of their country.
19,	Neither can we disregard the attempts of the South Viet-Nam authorities to disrupt the agreements concluded at Geneva in July 1954 which led to the cessation of hostilities in Indochina. The free elections provided for in the Geneva Agreements on Indochina must be held throughout the territory of Viet-Nam next year, in accordance with the national interests of the peoples of Viet-Nam.
20.	A major event this year was the Bandung Conference of Asian and African countries, at which more than half the population of the world was represented. This Conference took a decisive stand against colonialist oppression. It decided, among other things, that “colonialism in all its manifestations was an evil which should speedily be brought to an end”. The participants in the Bandung Conference expressed their support for the cause of peace and independence of all colonial and dependent peoples. The United Nations cannot fail to take the opinions expressed at this Conference into account when it examines a number of important Asian and African problems.
21.	The success of the Bandung Conference was to a very great extent due to the participation of the People’s Republic of China, whose role in the settlement of Asian and Far Eastern problems is steadily growing more important. It is impossible, now, to think seriously of settling these problems in the absence of the People's Republic of China. Nevertheless, the representatives of 600 million Chinese people are still refused admission to the United Nations. In refusing to admit China to the United Nations, some States do not wish to face-the fact that this great State is growing and becoming stronger, and that its lawful Government, which enjoys the full support of all its people, exercises authority over an enormous area. Those who continue to insist that the Kuomintang representatives speak for China in the United Nations are ignoring historical facts and are attempting to preserve an unreal situation in our Organization.
22.	Another reason which prevents the United Nations from functioning normally is that many countries are still not represented in it. Certain representatives who spoke here said that the problem of the admission of new Members to the United Nations could be solved only after the Charter had been reviewed. However, it is quite obvious that the fact that the problem of the admission of new Members has not been resolved cannot be blamed on the Charter. We believe that the best solution of this question would be the simultaneous admission to the United Nations of the 16 States which have applied for membership.
23.	We are witnessing a sustained attack on the principle of the unanimity of the five permanent members of the Security Council, designed to bring about a review of those Articles of the Charter in which this principle is contained. In the opinion of my delegation, such attempts to have the Charter reviewed, to strike at its very foundations and to undermine the principle of unanimity, weaken the United Nations and thereby hamper it in its efforts to carry out its basic task of maintaining peace and international security. The United Nations should do everything to ensure that the Security Council again becomes an organ capable of bringing about the peaceful settlement of any kind of dispute and dangerous situation, and the elimination of any circumstances which prevent the strengthening of friendly relations between nations striving for peace. The United Nations must remain faithful to its Charter and to the principle, of the unanimity of the five permanent members of the Security Council. It must encourage constructive co-operation among all States. My delegation considers that the United Nations Charter in its present form is perfectly adequate to its task, which is to strengthen world peace and promote international co-operation; it therefore sees no need for calling a general conference to review the Charter.
24.	The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR fully shares the views expressed by the Chairman of the Soviet Union delegation, Mr. Molotov [520th meeting] and supports the draft resolution which he submitted on “Measures for the Further Relaxation of International Tension and the Development of International Cooperation” [A/2981]. Mr. Molotov’s statement and the draft resolution proposed by the Soviet Union illustrate the earnest wish of the peoples and Government of the Soviet Union to live in peace and friendship with all nations, to strive for a further relaxation of international tension and the strengthening of confidence between States. We hope that the General Assembly will adopt the Soviet Union draft resolution; by so doing it will make a valuable contribution to the development of international co-operation and the strengthening of international peace and security.
25.	One of the surest and most promising ways of achieving mutual understanding between nations and strengthening friendly relations and peace between States is by establishing firm international bonds. The United Nations should declare itself in favour of close and permanent contact between people of different nations and professions, contacts between individuals, exchanges of scientific, social and parliamentary delegations, theatrical and sports groups, and business delegations, the expansion of international travel the organization of festivals and so forth.
26.	The Soviet Union is doing its best to establish closer and better contacts with the peoples of all countries. The relations of the Byelorussian SSR with other States are also being extended and strengthened. For example, in the period from June 1952 to September 1955, 60 delegations and individual representatives from foreign countries visited Byelorussia. These people, of different callings, ages, political opinions and religious faiths, all desired an extension of cultural relations between countries, and their attitude was widely welcomed and supported by the Byelorussian people. It should also be noted that every year thousands of persons representing our social, scientific, artistic, cultural and sports associations travel to various countries of the world in order to become better acquainted with the life of the peoples of those countries. We advocate a broad expansion of friendly contacts between countries because we recognize the fact that the peoples of all countries are vitally interested in a further relaxation of international tension.
27.	However, it would be a naive delusion to rest on our laurels and overlook the other difficulties in the way of a settlement of outstanding problems. Neither should we disregard the fact that in some countries there are forces which do not want to relax international tension. They oppose the peaceful settlement of controversial international problems, advocate interference in the affairs of other countries and nations and endeavour to force their will on other States. Attempts are also being made to discredit the principle of peaceful coexistence between States with different social and political systems, which is generally recognized and has received legal sanction in a number of international documents. Unfortunately attempts of this kind are being made even within the United Nations itself. Certain representatives at this very session of the General Assembly have asked the countries which have undertaken to build a new life for themselves to fulfil certain “prerequisites” of peaceful coexistence, at the same time distorting the purposes and goals of the internal and foreign policies of these States. My delegation considers that the General Assembly should condemn the attempts made by some representatives to revive the policy of the “cold war” in the United Nations.
28.	We have heard the Chiang Kai-shek representative make the usual stereotyped statement, full of slander and insinuations against the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China. I consider that his statement was too devoid of substance for me to join issue with him.
29.	The task of the United Nations is to bring about the earliest possible settlement of important questions, and to assist other States in solving outstanding international problems. The United Nations should do everything in its power to preserve and strengthen the “spirit of Geneva”, and bear in mind that the paramount duty of all States, whether or not they are Members of the United Nations, should be to take effective steps to strengthen confidence in the mutual relations between States. The United Nations should call upon the Governments of all States to make greater use of the method of negotiations in the settlement of outstanding international problems, It should appeal to all States with large armed forces to make substantial reductions in their armed forces and military budgets now, as a token of goodwill, without waiting for the conclusion of an international agreement on the implementation of an agreed programme for a general reduction of armaments, and at the same time not to relax their efforts to bring about the conclusion of an agreement of this kind. We should call on the Governments of States which maintain air, and naval bases on foreign territories to follow the example of the Soviet Union and to dismantle such bases at the earliest possible time. The peace-loving nations expect the United Nations to fulfil the hopes which they placed in the Organization when it was set up ten years ago.
30.	My delegation is quite convinced that agreed decisions to strengthen peace and international security can be adopted within the United Nations. However, in order to settle any important international problem satisfactorily, we must first of all establish within our Organization a noised situation, based on confidence, mutual understanding, respect for the sovereign rights of nations and for their social and political systems. It is to this end that all the future activities of the United Nations should be directed.
31.	The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR is confident that the United Nations will fulfil its duty, do everything necessary to carry out the noble purposes and principles of the Charter, take all steps to eliminate the threat of another war, promote the establishment of the necessary confidence between States and endeavour to maintain and strengthen international peace.
