51.	I should like to greet this session of the General Assembly, on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation and the Czechoslovak people, and to wish it every success in its responsible work.
52.	The tenth session of the General Assembly is meeting after a number of international negotiations and conferences which have greatly contributed to an improvement in relations among States. This development is a reflection of the mighty movement of peoples striving to achieve a relaxation of international tension, to consolidate peace, to remove the threat of a new war, and to develop friendly co-operation among nations.
53.	The change in international relations was in particular brought about by the Geneva Conference of the Heads of Government, which proved that it was really possible to put an end to the so-called “cold war” and confirmed the advantages of negotiation as the only correct method of solving international problems.
54.	The Czechoslovak Government welcomed the results of the Geneva Conference and regards them as a convincing proof that peaceful coexistence and cooperation among States of different social and political structures are possible.
55.	The atmosphere of the “cold war”, which existed; for the greater part of the post-war decade, could not but engender many controversial international problems which it was impossible to solve during the course of a few days at the Geneva Conference. However, it is to the great credit of the participants in the Conference that they laid a good foundation for the solution of these problems and for the establishment of mutual confidence among States.
56.	We must all display great patience and goodwill and co-operate loyally, if we are to consolidate and further to extend the improvement in international relations already achieved.
57.	The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic will help in every way to develop the results of the Geneva Conference and will also support all further efforts to solve outstanding international questions, and to strengthen and extend international co-operation.
58.	The Czechoslovak delegation also hopes that our discussions at the tenth session of the General Assembly will be conducted in this spirit and serve to consolidate and carry still further the progress made at the Geneva Conference.
59.	The negotiations at the Geneva Conference were conducted first and foremost in a spirit of recognition of the principle of peaceful coexistence and cooperation between States with different social and political systems. All the participants in the Conference spoke in favour of this principle and it was also supported unanimously by the African and Asian countries at the Bandung Conference. For that reason we would have expected that no one would regard differences in social and political systems as obstacles to peaceful co-operation. We cannot but regret the unwarranted and unjust attacks that are still being made — we have heard some even at this session — against the social system of the people’s democracies. However, these voices cannot in any way change the fact that the people are master in the people’s democracies, that they freely chose the political system most acceptable to them and the government that is most capable of defending their interests and doing everything to ensure their peace and security.
60.	Although these voices are those of individuals they do not contribute to the efforts being made to relax international tension and to establish friendly relations among nations. It is therefore high time to put an end to them once and for all.
61.	The progress recently made in relaxing international tension and developing friendly co-operation among nations undoubtedly contributes to the successful fulfilment of the principal tasks of the United Nations.
62.	On the other hand our Organization itself is bound to take effective steps to help achieve further progress and thereby contribute substantially to the strengthening of world peace and international security. Our general debate has shown the enormous importance of the Geneva Conference; to the work, of the United Nations. It is right and desirable that the General Assembly, in the interests of a peaceful and tranquil life for peoples throughout the world should continue along the path laid down at Geneva.
63.	The Soviet Union’s unflagging efforts in carrying out its policy of peace played a decisive part in the improvement of international relations and have been deeply appreciated by world public opinion. An illustration of these efforts is to be found in the draft resolution [A/2981] on “Measures for the further relaxation of international tension and the development of international co-operation” submitted by Mr. Molotov [520th meeting], Chairman of the Soviet delegation and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR.
64.	At the time of the Geneva Conference important proposals were submitted on the removal of the threat of a new war, the achievement of security and confidence and the creation of conditions for a peaceful and tranquil life of peoples throughout the world. Unquestionably there are other ways of solving these important questions, apart from the methods suggested in these proposals. The consideration of all these proposals by the General Assembly, as proposed in the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union delegation, will undoubtedly further relax international tension, promote mutual confidence and develop cooperation among nations, and also accomplish our Organization’s principal task.
65.	 In the present international situation, the problem of European security is one of the questions of decisive I importance to the consolidation of peace throughout the world. History teaches us that the splitting of Europe into military blocs has always been one of the main sources of the conflicts which in the last 50 years have culminated in two world wars.
66.	Czechoslovakia, situated in the heart of Europe, is vitally interested in the question of European security. The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic, bearing in mind the historical experience of the Czech and Slovak peoples, has repeatedly emphasized that the best way of ensuring the security of Czechoslovakia and all European nations is to establish a general European collective security system, which would prevent the formation of opposing military blocs and would embrace all European countries, regardless of their social, and political systems.
67.	We are of the opinion that the task of establishing a general European collective security system, with the participation of the United States of America, would be greatly facilitated if all participating countries would agree to the dissolution of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Western European Union, as well as to the abrogation of the Warsaw Treaty between eight countries. If this cannot be done at once, then we feel that the Soviet Union’s proposal to solve the problem of European security by stages, answers the needs of Czechoslovakia and of all European countries, regardless of their membership in present groupings of States.
68.	Naturally, nobody will deny the right of any State to take such measures to ensure its own security as it considers most effective. Yet at the same time the legitimate interest of other countries in their own security cannot be disregarded.
69.	The formation of military blocs and the establishment of military bases on foreign territories deepen distrust between States and thereby increase interactional tension and make it necessary for States against which these blocs and bases are directed to take counter measures. The experience of recent years has shown that this situation does not lead to the ensuring of international security but, on the contrary, threatens it.
70.	The German question is closely linked to the problem of European security. It is impossible to imagine an effective collective security system in Europe which overlooks the part played by Germany in the history of Europe and the world, and which does not take account of the present situation in Germany.
71.	Czechoslovakia, the only State which has both the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany as its neighbours, is exceptionally interested in the peaceful settlement of the German question, if only for reasons of its own security.
72.	Czechoslovakia welcomed the establishment of normal diplomatic relations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Federal Republic of Germany; this step contributes greatly to the settlement of outstanding problems relating to Germany as a whole and to the development of mutual understanding and co-operation in the interests of peace and security in Europe,
73.	However, we cannot fail to feel concern at the fact that Western Germany is still included in closed Western military groups and is following the path of resurgent militarism. This situation evokes well-founded apprehensions on the part of European nations and is also a serious obstacle to the reunification of Germany,
74.	No proposals relating to the peaceful reunification of Germany can get away from the fact that at present there are two German States, with different social and political systems.
75.	To ignore that fact and not to recognize the existence of one of these two States and to exclude its Government from negotiations on the solution of the German problem would be to ignore the political realities of the present time. The Treaty of 20 September 1955 on relations between the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic, based as it is on the principle of equality, mutual respect for sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs, gives the German Democratic Republic an opportunity freely to solve questions relating to its domestic and foreign policy and its relations with the Federal Republic of Germany and all other States. The agreement will thus contribute to a solution of the German question and the establishment of a unified, peace-loving, democratic German State. We are convinced that it is precisely within the framework of a European security system that the problem of German reunification can be solved in the interests of the German and of all other European peoples.
76.	The Czechoslovak Government reaffirms that it will continue to do everything possible to contribute to the successful solution of the German question on the basis of sincere respect for the wishes and interests of the German people, and in complete accordance with the requirements of peace and security in Europe, We shall continue to strengthen and develop our friendly co-operation with the German Democratic Republic and we are ready to establish normal neighbourly relations with the Federal Republic of Germany.
77.	In line with its sincere desire to promote friendly relations among nations, Czechoslovakia welcomed the conclusion of the State Treaty on the establishment of an independent and democratic Austria and in particular the fact that Austria pledged itself to a policy of permanent neutrality. Czechoslovakia acceded to the State Treaty on the establishment of an independent and democratic Austria, and considers that at the present time all the. conditions for the development of good-neighbourly relations and peaceful co-operation between Czechoslovakia and Austria have been fulfilled.
78.	Czechoslovakia also sincerely welcomed the normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. This development is a noteworthy contribution to the improvement of the international situation and the strengthening of confidence among nations. True to the historical tradition of friendship between the peoples of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, we shall continue to strengthen our mutual relations and cooperate in all fields to the advantage of both our countries and in the interests of peace.
79.	The present improvement in international relations has also paved the way for relaxation of tension in the Far East. Universal peace cannot be consolidated unless lasting peace is ensured in the Far East. However, the situation in that area remains unsatisfactory and constitutes a threat to peace and security throughout the world. The situation in the Taiwan area is still tense. The Geneva agreements on the restoration of peace in Indochina are endangered. The peaceful reunification of Korea, after more than two years of armistice, has yet to be achieved. Czechoslovakia, as a member of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, is carrying out under difficult conditions the task it assumed and is thereby helping to consolidate the armistice in Korea.
80.	The collective peace pact proposed by the two largest Asian States — India and the People’s Republic of China — and supported by the other Asian nations would be a suitable basis for the solution of all controversial questions in that part of the world and a valuable contribution to international security and the maintenance of peace throughout the world.
81.	The satisfactory solution of outstanding questions in Europe and Asia would undoubtedly further strengthen confidence among States and thereby advance the solution of other basic problems of international importance. We refer primarily to questions of disarmament, the reduction of armaments and armed forces and the prohibition of atomic, hydrogen and other weapons of mass destruction.
82.	The armaments race and the invention by modern military technology of ever more destructive methods, have for several years been arousing the deep and justified apprehension of the peoples. The experience of recent years and of past wars show that armaments increase international tension and the danger of war and, finally, lead to war.
83.	The need to preserve and consolidate peace throughout the world, which is the desire of all peoples, unquestionably necessitates a substantial reduction of armaments and the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction.
84.	The Czechoslovak Government welcomes the positive results achieved in this field. In particular it especially appreciates recent Soviet proposals, which to a great extent brought the Powers closer together on this question. We hope that the examination of these proposals, together with the other proposals submitted at the Geneva Conference, by the Heads of Government of the four Powers will produce a solution acceptable to all participating countries.
85. We must take steps to ensure that the decisions of the Geneva Conference of the Heads of Government are scrupulously carried out and to preserve the spirit of this Conference, which changed the international situation by promoting confidence and mutual understanding among States. That was why a wide public in all countries whole-heartedly welcomed the practical steps already taken by the Government of the Soviet Union and the Governments of other countries in reducing their armed forces.
86.	The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic, realizing how important were the results of the Geneva Conference, has reduced the Czechoslovak army by 34,000 men in order further to relax international tension and increase confidence among States.
87.	The time has come for States to go from words to deeds, even in so complex a question as that of the reduction of armaments and the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction. The example set by the Soviet Union and the countries of the people’s democracies proves that, pending complete agreement on disarmament, practical results can be attained in this field. If the other countries too begin to take specific measures in the matter of reducing armaments, the solution of the problem of disarmament and, thereby, the establishment and strengthening of the reign of confidence among States will of course be greatly facilitated.
88.	The International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy held in August 1955 in Geneva demonstrated the tremendous possibilities for improving the living standards and the well-being of mankind if atomic energy is used exclusively for peaceful purposes.
89.	The first International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy showed that the road of negotiation in a spirit of international co-operation and joint examination of problems — even in a most complex matter hitherto veiled in the deepest secrecy — leads to thorough-going benefits, provided that the participants have the welfare and happiness of mankind as their primary concern.
90.	Czechoslovakia has at all times stood for the principle of broad international co-operation in all fields of international life, including that of the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
91.	Czechoslovak scientists took an active part in the International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, as well as in the closed discussions of the six States which followed the Conference. From its own experience Czechoslovakia can appreciate the significance of international co-operation and assistance when not linked to political or economic conditions of any kind. Thanks to the assistance it receives from the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia has great opportunities rapidly to achieve a standard of scientific research in nuclear physics and the practical application of atomic energy for peaceful purposes that, but for such assistance, would be attainable by Czechoslovakia — in spite of the high level of development of its science and industry — only after a lengthy, arduous, intensive and expensive research procedure.
92.	The present year has been marked by considerable successes in the relaxation of international tension and the development of international relations. We have seen confirmation of the fact that improvement in the international situation and the development of mutual co-operation among nations, particularly economic and cultural co-operation, are closely linked and that one affects the other.
93.	In economic relations, and especially in international trade, we have witnessed in recent years an accumulation of obstacles which interefere with normal relations among States and disturb traditional economic channels. Such obstacles impair mutual relations among the peoples.
94.	It is now generally recognized that international economic relations must be developed and that the development of international trade leads to the intensification and strengthening of peaceful and friendly coexistence among peoples and States. Such recognition is, of itself, a big step forward. Recent experience has likewise demonstrated what an important part reciprocal visits, discussions, conferences and meetings of scientists, artists, workers, farmers and journalists of different countries play in the development and intensification of relations among peoples. Here, special emphasis must be given to the importance of direct contacts among the parliaments of various countries.
95.	The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic supports all endeavours to improve countries’ knowledge of one another through direct contacts and reciprocal visits. Thousands of visitors come’ to our country every year. This summer, on the occasion of the Spartakiáda, our nation-wide physical culture holiday, a large number of foreign visitors, including thousands of nationals, of Western countries, came to Czechoslovakia. There has been a constant increase in the exchange of delegations and tourists between Czechoslovakia and other countries. International music and film festivals are regularly held in Czechoslovakia, and there is an extensive exchange of artists and theatrical companies, with wide participation by guests from all countries of the world. In the interest of strengthening economic ties, Czechoslovakia participates every year in dozens of international exhibitions and trade fairs. We are convinced that knowing one another helps to eliminate prejudices and strengthens confidence among States.
96.	All peoples, regardless of political and social systems, have a common and profound interest in the exchange of scientific, technological, cultural and artistic experience and knowledge.
97.	That is why the Czechoslovak delegation welcomes the suggestion of the head of the Soviet delegation to hold regular, and if possible annual, conferences of scientists from all countries, not only in the field of atomic energy but in other fields of science and technology.
98.	In concluding my statement, I should like to touch upon some questions concerning the United Nations directly. In the first place, I would draw attention to an abnormal situation which, constitutes a serious obstacle to the successful fulfilment of the basic tasks of our Organization and undermines its authority. I am referring to the fact that there is no lawful representation in the United Nations of one of the five great Powers and permanent members of the Security Council, the People’s Republic of China.
99.	Any fair-minded person can clearly see how untenable and harmful is a situation in which a mighty Asian Power, which in recent years has had such an outstanding record of achievement in peaceful construction at home as well as in the international field, is wrongfully excluded from the work of our Organization by procedural manoeuvres.
100.	The restoration of the lawful rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations will undoubtedly serve to enhance the authority of our Organization, help it to fulfil its function under the Charter, and contribute to the relaxation of international tension and the solution of the important international political problems of the times.
101.	Another question that has long awaited a just solution is that of the admission of new Members to our Organization. In the interest of strengthening the United Nations and of increasing its significance, all States fulfilling the requirements imposed by the Charter on Members of our Organization must be admitted to membership without discrimination and enabled to take part in its work. That is why the Czechoslovak delegation will give its full support to the USSR delegation’s proposal [520th meeting], which is aimed at a just solution of this problem.
102.	The activities of the United Nations in the last decade show that, while the Organization has in' many respects not fulfilled the hopes that peace-loving peoples had placed in it, its work has had many positive results.
103.	The United Nations Charter is rightly considered the most important international document of the postwar period. That is true because the Charter unites, on a realistic basis, the efforts of countries with different social systems and directs them towards the common objective of defending universal peace and international security. In contemporary historical conditions it represents an important instrument for preserving the principles of law and right in the mutual relations of States. The United Nations Charter sets forth principles which harmonize the natural aspirations of nations for the purpose of attaining the common aims of consolidation of peace and security, development of friendly relations among peoples, and peaceful settlement of all controversial questions.
104.	The first decade in the existence of the United Nations has proved the correctness of the principles on which the Charter is based. The first ten years of our Organization have enriched mankind with valuable experience. Especially important is the realization that, whenever the Charter was consistently respected in solving international problems, the results were mostly positive. Contrariwise, deviation from the Charter or violation of its principles always proved harmful to the Organization and to friendly co-operation among the peoples.
105.	This fact is convincing evidence that the Charter of our Organization has proved itself in severe tests and that, instead of revision, what it needs is the complete support and full confidence of all.
106.	The indispensable prerequisite for the fulfilment of the mission of the United Nations is consistent respect for the Charter and not its revision.
107.	The best of statutes, even if included in so important an international document as the Charter of our Organization, will remain only a dead letter unless supported by the good faith of the Member States and their genuine desire to maintain universal peace and international security.
108.	Czechoslovakia has always striven and will continue to strive for strict observance of our Charter. The Czechoslovak Government, expressing the unanimous will of the entire Czechoslovak people, will consistently work for the relaxation of international tension and the development of friendly co-operation among peoples. It will continue to support the United Nations in its great mission - the strengthening of international peace and security.
