90.	I feel convinced that everybody in this Assembly will understand that I, speaking as representative of the Danish delegation, feel impelled to express my sincere sympathy with the people of the United States in their deep concern about the health of President Eisenhower. I need not say what the name of Eisenhower stands for in contemporary history, not only in the United States, but in the entire world. Today, as before, our warmest feelings go to President Eisenhower to whom we wish, from the bottom of our hearts, a speedy recovery.
91.	Several delegations have voiced, from this rostrum, their satisfaction at the improvement in the international atmosphere which has taken place during the last few months.
92.	I know that repetitions are tiring and I shall try to avoid them, but there are certain points which I desire to stress on behalf of my country. We hail with great satisfaction the improvement in the international situation, for a real improvement will renew the hope and belief that the United Nations — whose first ten years were so turbulent and so full of tension — will succeed in reaching the high goals laid down in the Charter.
93.	The Government and the people of Denmark were therefore very happy to see the four Occupation Powers agree to conclude a State Treaty with Austria. We hope that this may prove to be a first step towards agreement on the many great issues that stand between East and West.
94.	The Geneva Conference of Heads of Government last July was another good omen. They could not, of course, be expected to reach final solutions of the great problems which they discussed. The meeting acquired its importance through the contact, personal and otherwise, established between West and East. Sustained efforts may pave the way for real relief of the political tension in the world.
95.	The Foreign Ministers of the four great Powers will meet at Geneva in the near future. The Danish Government hopes that they may succeed in making another step forward towards understanding and agreement. We realize in Denmark that this is by no means an easy task. Great patience and great understanding will be called for. It is necessary that both parties prove their good intentions. The final goal, freedom from fear and a just solution of the political difficulties, must always be kept in mind.
96.	It has, however, been brought home to the generation to which we belong that mere appeasement will bring us no real peace. Denmark therefore joined the purely defensive North Atlantic Treaty which was concluded in conformity with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter and which is based on the principles of maintaining international peace and security expressed in the Charter.
97.	My Government will give whole-hearted support to all honest efforts to relieve international tensions and to serve the ends of peace. I do not propose to pursue this matter any further on this occasion, but I wish merely to stress the importance which a reunification of Germany, in peace and liberty and based on free elections, will have for peace and security in Europe.
98.	The agenda for the tenth session of the General Assembly is a heavy one, and some of its items concern problems which are a constant source of unrest and anxiety. It is not only total war, world war, which brings disaster. All armed conflicts involving bloodshed and loss of human lives cause grief and bitterness to men and lead to new disunity which spreads discord among the nations. One example of such an unfortunate conflict is the clash between Israel and its Arab neighbours. My Government notes with great satisfaction the constructive proposal for a permanent settlement of the conflict submitted by the Secretary of State of the United States on 26 August 1955. In our view this initiative holds out so many positive possibilities for peaceful and progressive developments for the peoples of Israel and the Arab countries that it deserves the most serious and careful consideration by everyone concerned.
99.	There is also unrest in other parts of the world, and this is clearly reflected in the agenda. Without going into details, there is one general aspect to which I should like to draw your attention. In the past ten years many different problems have been brought before the United Nations. The Danish Government is of the opinion that the General Assembly is not necessarily an appropriate forum for all such problems. Some of them would undoubtedly lend themselves better to direct negotiations between the parties involved.
100.	It is understandable that many nations use the rostrum of the United Nations to make their views and problems known to the world. The General Assembly is, indeed, a useful forum for expression of world opinion on issues which concern all or a considerable number of nations.
101.	On the other hand we must not forget that the Charter imposes an obligation on the United Nations to seek solutions to the problems which are submitted to the Organization. However, it will not always further a solution to have the problems aired in public debate before 60 nations — nor, indeed, to force a vote on resolutions. Such procedures may make it more difficult to solve a problem. Furthermore, they may detract from the prestige of the United Nations since they may lead to a state of affairs where the Organization becomes saddled with unsolved problems. Instead of achieving what was intended, namely, a more equitable solution, the result may be a weakening of the United Nations which, in turn, will mean a setback on the way to our common goal. It also detracts from the prestige of the United Nations if resolutions are adopted which cannot be — or at least are not — implemented. Resolutions which remain on paper do not strengthen the United Nations. The Danish delegation will therefore see it as its task to promote a policy of moderation and calm consideration.
102.	There is another very important point which it will be natural to bring up in this connexion. It must be a common interest of all nations to work towards the creation of a solid foundation of international law. The Secretary-General raises this question in his excellent annual report [A/2911], and the Danish delegation is in full agreement with his observations on this point. The uncertain and fragmentary character of international law makes it understandable that there is a tendency to seek a political settlement, even in cases where a conflict stems from questions of law. On the other hand, I believe that all countries will agree that we have a common interest in reaching settlements of as many matters as possible on principles of law. In the long run this will safeguard, not threaten, the freedom and independence of national States.
103.	In this connexion the Danish Government would like to see the General Assembly avail itself of advisory opinions from the International Court of Justice much more often than has been the practice so far. On various occasions we have suggested that such opinions be obtained, and we hope that this may find wider acceptance in the future.
104.	Another item which the Secretary-General emphasizes in his report, and of which my Government is deeply conscious, is the principle of universality. The spirit of the Charter craves that the United Nations become a universal forum for the peoples of the world. Only in that way will the United Nations be able to live up to its obligations to safeguard peace and to promote international co-operation.
105.	My Government therefore sincerely hopes that these difficulties may be overcome which have so far prevented a considerable number of States from obtaining membership in the Organization. It certainly should be possible, as a result of the improvement in the international situation which now appears to have come about, to increase the membership of the United Nations.
106.	I do not intend here to examine this question in detail. I wish, however, in this connexion to point out that very many in the General Assembly strongly favour that the question of China’s representation be settled in accordance with the factual situation in China.
107.	In accordance with the Charter, the agenda includes the question of holding a general conference of the Member States for the purpose of reviewing the Charter.
108.	We all realize that this is a question which gives rise to great difficulties. My Government has given careful thought to the problems arising in this connexion. We do realize that the Charter is not in all respects a perfect document. It is the work of human beings and, therefore, it has its shortcomings. A revision would thus in principle seem desirable, and hence also a conference, provided that this is the proper time. On the other hand, we feel that the deficiencies we would like to see corrected are not always caused by the words of the Charter, but very often by the manner in which it is used, or perhaps rather left unused.
109.	The Charter lays down many great principles, and the Member States have set themselves tasks of high importance. The spirit of the Charter has found its expression in the Preamble. Here are embodied precepts which, if they are truly observed, will create a better world. This applies in particular to the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes and the principle of international co-operation in economic and social affairs. Article 26 of the Charter which, “in order to promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security”, provides a system for the regulation of armaments, has now led to promising negotiations. We long^ for the day when the lofty idea embodied in that Article will become a reality. The fact that the Charter contains positive elements such as I have mentioned here should be borne in mind whenever the Charter is being evaluated.
110.	The difficulties seem to stem, not so much from the tenor of the Charter as from political and economic circumstances. It would therefore be useful also to consider whether adjustments in the practices adopted by the United Nations, as indicated by the Secretary- General, might not be desirable.
111.	My Government has followed with keen interest the great developments which are in progress in Africa and Asia. It was, indeed, gratifying to see the Powers participating in the Afro-Asian Conference at Bandung express their unreserved adherence to the principles of the United Nations. This has reaffirmed the hope of the Danish Government that the United Nations may succeed in becoming not only a place where the nations of the world meet, but also an institution able efficiently to help and encourage mankind on its way forwards and upwards.
112.	Inspired by a desire to promote this development, Denmark has therefore made a contribution to the United Nations substantial for its resources, to assist what are, in a misleading term, called the underdeveloped countries. The Danish Government will continue to participate in this work.
113.	The Danish Government has noted with satisfaction that a draft agreement has been prepared for the establishment of an International Finance Corporation and that the number of countries required have indicated their willingness to contribute to the International Finance Corporation. Already this autumn my Government intends to table proposals in Parliament for Denmark’s accession to the International Finance Corporation agreement and for payment of the contribution stipulated for Denmark.
114.	The discussions about the establishment of the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development (SUNFED) have been much more difficult. There hardly seems to be any immediate prospect of starting it. The Danish Government has, however, adopted a positive attitude also towards SUNFED, and we have indicated that we are ready to make a contribution compatible with the size and economic resources of our country, provided that other countries, and especially the big countries, are prepared to participate.
115.	To us in Denmark the wish for a reduction of armaments is in complete harmony with our entire conception of the manner in which it is desirable that world conditions develop. We have realized, as I have already said, that mere appeasement will not lead to real peace. This is why we joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). We feel convinced of the political wisdom of that step, not least because we think that this defensive treaty has contributed to the creation of an atmosphere favourable to a relaxation of tension. We are fully prepared to meet the resulting obligations.
116.	But the Danish people cherish the ardent wish that developments may make it possible to devote a much smaller proportion of our resources than is now the case, to objects of a military nature. To our mind the great and exalted goal is for mankind to devote its strength and its energy to the peaceful objects of making life better and more happy. For this reason we are also highly interested in the efforts to prevent atomic power from being used for terribly destructive weapons, and to turn it to peaceful work. Denmark has no raw materials for atomic power. But Danish science and research, with intense interest, take part in the international co-operation on the peaceful use of atomic power, and we trust that a Danish contribution to these efforts will be forthcoming in the future as has been the case in the past.
117.	The safeguarding of peace and the reduction of armaments are of course the great goals of international co-operation. The resulting lowering of expenditure for military purposes will allow for great progress in all parts of the world. The atomic age, which it has become the privilege and the danger of our generation to enter, ought to herald a new and richer epoch for mankind.
118.	We trust that these hopes and wishes are shared by the peoples in all countries.