84.	The delegation of Liberia takes this occasion to congratulate Mr. Maza upon his unanimous election to preside over this session of the General Assembly of the United Nations — a fitting tribute to his long and tireless efforts, in this Organization, dedicated to world peace and human fellowship.
85.	During the last ten years, since the founding of the United Nations, we have witnessed a change from the co-operative spirit at San Francisco to the hardening of positions, resulting in heightened tension in the relationship between nations, which ultimately assumed the ugly proportions of what has been known as the “cold war”.
86.	As we commence this session of the Assembly, however, we are happy to note what appears to be a change of climate — a relaxing of tension. Perhaps this new atmosphere is due, in some measure, to the meeting of the Heads of Government of the four Powers in Geneva in July 1955, to the Asian-African Conference at Bandung, and to the International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
87.	The purposes of these conferences were, among other things, to bring about a relaxation of tensions and to promote world peace and security. The measure of their success may, in our opinion, be assessed to a considerable extent by the moderation and restraint which characterize this year’s debate. This appears to us a good omen, and it is our hope that we will do everything to improve this atmosphere and open wider the doors of opportunity for calm and deliberate discussions of the more immediate and burning questions on our agenda.
88.	During the latter part of the past year, the Governments of Burma, Ceylon, India, Indonesia and Pakistan extended invitations to a number of African and Asian countries to meet and discuss certain problems peculiar to the peoples of the two continents, Liberia, with 28 other nations, responded to the invitation and met at Bandung in April 1955.
89.	There, for the first time in recorded history, the  representatives of over half the world’s population living in Africa and Asia met on a basis of equality to do what no one else is willing or able to do for them — to discuss and find means for their mutual uplift and betterment, and thus promote world peace. There, the representatives of peoples of different races, colours, religions and ideologies met and discussed their mutual problems, harmonized their varied points of differences and expressed their agreements in resolutions unanimously carried — resolutions which were sober and restrained, although they dealt with such exciting questions as colonialism, racialism, sovereignty and human rights. We must here record, before this Assembly, our appreciation of the wisdom and foresight of the sponsoring countries and their courageous leaders. Truly the historic Conference at Bandung will be recorded in history as one of the greatest political landmarks of the present century.
90.	In July of this year, the Heads of Government of the four Powers met in Geneva to see what could be done towards, lessening the tension in which the world had been firmly affixed for nearly a decade, and to explore the possibilities for active co-operation among all States. So far, it would seem that some relaxation has been obtained, as is evidenced by the tone of the discussions here in this Assembly; and we can only hope that it will be extended to even broader fields of contact.
91.	Moved, doubtless, by the realization that an atomic war would, in all probability, be one in which the human race would destroy itself, the courageous plan to use the power of the atom for the uplift of man, rather than his self-destruction, was initiated in this Assembly [470th meeting] by President Eisenhower of the United States, for whom, in his present illness, the delegation of Liberia prays a speedy and complete recovery.
92.	In August of this year the International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy met in Geneva, Almost every country in the world sent delegates and observers to this conference which we hope has opened a new era — an era of collaboration for the uplift and betterment of humanity, and the opening of broader vistas for better living standards and human happiness.
93.	Since 1950, no new Members have been admitted to the Organization, although 21 applicants have submitted requests to partake with us in the erection of a dynamic and universal structure dedicated to world peace. We are all well acquainted with the background of the situation which has caused this regrettable deadlock. What better sign could there be of a real and true relaxing of tension than that some compromise could be reached between the two divergent views, and an arrangement arrived at whereby at least a large majority of the applicants could be admitted, thus bringing a greater degree of universality to our Organization? The delegation of Liberia sincerely hopes that, in the very favourable atmosphere which pervades the present session, a solution of the question will be found and thus bring the United Nations nearer to the character it was intended to possess.
94.	There is one quality which we cannot successfully divorce from the term “peace”, and that is its universality. It follows, therefore, that although all may be at peace in the western hemisphere or in Europe, while in Africa and Asia men are giving their life’s blood for liberty and freedom, peace is still something that we must strive to attain. We cannot close our eyes or our ears to the violence, massacres, death and inhumanity raging in the northern parts of the African continent. To do so would be to act like the ostrich Which, when tired from the chase, shoves its head into a narrow hole and thinks that in so doing it is hiding, its enormous body.
95.	Neither shot nor shell has been known in history to quell or silence the desire of men to be free. We should be more reluctant in calling names, such as “terrorists” and “rebels”, when we refer to people whose only crime is the yearning for freedom and liberty, who desire to have something to say about the government-of their native land, who nourish an honourable ambition for themselves and their children that they might enjoy the blessings of a good education, health and the better things of life. In our various lands, I dare say, many a national hero was at some time in their rugged histories branded a terrorist and a rebel. Let us hope that the spirit of conciliation and compromise, which seems now to be abroad, will be allowed to saturate the atmosphere not only of that disturbed area, where massacres and unequal battle are taking tremendous toll inhuman life and suffering, but of all other areas where similar inhumanity and repression are the order of the day, so that in due course peace may in deed and in truth reign over our troubled world
96.	The delegation of Liberia, ever willing and anxious to promote the cause of peace and justice, will do all in its power to co-operate towards the realization of these objectives at the present session.