155.	Many representatives have already addressed this Assembly in the course of the general debate. This simplifies my task here, because in respect of a number of issues I am in the happy position of being able to express my agreement with what has been said by previous speakers.
156.	First and foremost, I wish to follow the example of my predecessors at this rostrum by voicing my Government's profound satisfaction at Mr. Maza's election to the highest function in this Assembly. This satisfaction first of all concerns him personally. In the second place, we are happy to see a representative of Latin America unanimously elected to this important office, A short time ago, it was my privilege to visit a part of Latin America for the first time. During my stay there, I was deeply impressed by what I saw and was strengthened in my sincere conviction that a cordial understanding between the old world of Europe and the new world of Latin America is and ever will be one of the most essential conditions for the safeguarding of our civilization. It is especially for that reason that my delegation rejoices in having a representative of Latin America preside over the tenth session of the General Assembly.
157.	I cannot but agree whole-heartedly with those speakers who have welcomed in warm terms the emergence of what has been called the spirit of Geneva. The novel attitude of the Soviet Union has brought new hope to millions of people all over the world —  the hope that we are about to enter a better era, an era of lessening international tension. Whether this hope will be fulfilled is a question that may well be answered in the coming year. We should be completely aware of the importance — stressed in such a statesmanlike way by the representative of Australia [520th meeting] — that our great expectations of the future should be seen against the background of the reality of the present.
158.	We should not forget that no real problems have as yet been solved. A first opportunity for finding solutions will present itself at Geneva towards the end of next month. A relaxation of international tension will be most easily achieved on those issues which merely require a mutual acceptance of the existing situation. The real desire for peace will be put to the test when an attempt is made to deal with those problems whose solution implies a change of the status quo. For instance, if the Soviet Union should not accept the unification of Germany, a lasting settlement would remain out of reach.
159.	However, let me say once again that my Government rejoices in the results of the meeting “at the summit” in Geneva. To the Heads of Government who met there we owe a tribute for the upright fashion in which they discussed ways and means to solve the problems which keep the world divided in uneasy and suspicious factions.
160.	In this connexion, it is of vital importance that the two most powerful nations of the world, the United States of America and the Soviet Union, should try to bring about a rapprochement. If they are able to settle their differences, the chances of peace increase. This we most fervently hope, and we shall watch further progress towards this end in a constructive and positive frame of mind, while maintaining our careful vigilance. For the mere fact that agreement exists between the United States and the Soviet Union does not necessarily mean that all world problems have been solved.
161.	In no circumstances can Europe relinquish the duty of making its essential contribution to the cause of world peace. I hope I shall be forgiven for making special mention of Europe in this context: it is very near to my heart. I am, of course, fully aware of the significance of other groups of nations in this respect,
162.	Everyone who is sensitive to the main trends of history realizes that the role of a sound and strong bloc of Latin American nations is of the greatest significance for the conservation and strengthening of our ideals of peace and justice.
163.	My Government also attaches the utmost importance to the economic and social advancement of Asia and Africa for the future well-being of mankind. The Conference of Asian and African nations held at Bandung was an impressive manifestation of the political awareness of the many countries in those parts of the world — countries which hold such substantial promise for the present, and in particular for the future.
164.	No one could be surprised, however, that, at that same Bandung Conference, rather marked differences of opinion became apparent on such fundamental issues as dictatorship, communism or a free way of life.
165.	In the free part of Europe a very large measure of cohesion exists as to those problems. The slowly but steadily advancing unity of Europe is the most promising guarantee for the realization of our ideals of one world. Progress towards unity in Europe is slow; I readily admit that. However, with every passing year progress becomes more noticeable, and every year European cohesion grows more solid. Under the chairmanship of that great Belgian statesman, Mr. Spaak, discussions are taking place in Brussels with a view to achieving the integration in supra-national communities of new sectors of economic life, following the example set by the coal and. steel community in Luxembourg.
166.	On a smaller scale — that is in Benelux — integration is making even more progress. The Governments of the three countries constituting Benelux have now decided to establish a joint parliamentary body which will deal with a number of problems resulting from the union between the three partners.
167.	I have expressed my profound conviction that the role of Europe in the world is indispensable. If Europe is to fulfil its essential task, it is a first condition that its representation in the United Nations be adequate. For that reason it is really a matter of urgency to put an end to the absurd situation which at present prevents a country with such great political and cultural traditions as Italy from being a Member of our Organization. I sincerely trust that this and similar situations will be eliminated when we discuss the question of the admission of new Members.
168.	There are several other items on our agenda which will have the fullest attention of my delegation.
169.	First of all, there is the question of Netherlands New Guinea, which will be dealt with perhaps this afternoon in the General Committee. I shall not anticipate what will be said in that Committee, except' to say that the Netherlands Government trusts that this matter will not be included in the agenda of this session. All that could usefully be said about the matter was brought forward at the last session. The Netherlands delegation then made its position quite clear, and the stand of my Government has remained unchanged. We stated, inter alia, that the inhabitants of Netherlands New Guinea would, in due course, be given the opportunity to decide on their own political status. That promise still holds, and we will abide by it.
170.	I listened with great attention to what the representative of Indonesia said on this subject yesterday [527th meeting]. While fully endorsing Mr. Anak Agung’s plea for better understanding between our two countries, and while voicing my Government’s earnest desire to do all we can to achieve this end, I must, however, disagree with him on one point. We are convinced that, far from serving the cause of a rapprochement, the inclusion in the agenda and a subsequent discussion of the Netherlands New Guinea issue would seriously harm our common purpose. Therefore I cannot but describe the insistence of the Indonesian Government on having this matter placed on the agenda as a sad and regrettable error.
171.	Since we met last year, a momentous development has taken place in the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The three parts of the Kingdom — the Netherlands, Surinam and the Netherlands Antilles — have in joint consultation worked put and voluntarily accepted a new constitutional order, in which each of the countries autonomously conducts its internal interests and affairs, while they jointly conduct their common interests on a basis of absolute equality. It is a matter of great satisfaction in all three parts of the realm that this equitable solution of co-operation in freedom and equality has been achieved and that, in respect of Surinam and the Netherlands Antilles, the goal set in Chapter XI of the Charter has now been reached. During the course of this session, representatives of the three parts of the realm will have occasion to explain to the Members of the United Nations in detail the new structure of our kingdom.’
172.	Another item to which we attach great importance — and I am certain that this will be fully understood by all Members — is the financing of the economic development of under-developed areas. This subject was extensively dealt with at the twentieth session of the Economic and Social Council. For the first time in many years, it has been my country’s privilege to participate in the work of that Council. I call this a privilege because our delegations to this year’s sessions have been deeply impressed not only by the importance of the subjects dealt with but also by the high quality of the discussions themselves.
173.	My Government still considers the solution of the problem of the financing of economic development as the most essential condition for our future progress. Our Organization is advancing on the road towards this solution, but the advance is slow — to our mind, far too slow. During the debates in the Second Committee, we shall draw attention to this matter and we again shall advocate a more rapid implementation of our plans. I know that the countries which will have to bear the main burden of the execution of these plans hesitate to arouse false hopes. Of course, we respect their opinion. In the Committee, however, my delegation will again most earnestly request those countries not to stress their reservations on the subject to such an extent that they block the road to a further realization of the vast concepts that are to determine the future of hundreds of millions of people. We intend to ask them, in particular, not to decide, for instance, to abstain from co-operation in elaborating existing plans, a decision which in practice would almost amount to a veto.
174.	A subject which is to some extent related to the previous one, but which implies a different classification of the regions of the world, is that of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. At the opening of this session, and in another capacity, I mentioned the immeasurable promise implicit in the Geneva Conference on atomic energy. In the months before us, it will be our duty to draw our conclusions from the Secretary-General’s report on that Conference [A/2967] and to indicate the possibilities for future international co-operation in this field. In that connexion, we shall have some observations to. make on the International Atomic Energy Agency. We consider the plan to create this agency to be of paramount importance. We shall study the information which we may receive in relation to this plan with great care, bearing in mind the desiderata mentioned by our delegation in the First Committee during the ninth session of the General Assembly [708th meeting, para. 58]. One condition which we consider vital for the success of the agency is that there be no division of the countries of the world into “haves” and “have-nots” as regards nuclear material. Such a division would prove fatal. For this reason I express the hope that the agency will be clearly based on principles that will enable it to become a part of the structure of the United Nations.
175.	The subjects dealt with in the Fifth Committee are generally of a less spectacular nature than those discussed in the other Committees. My delegation intends, nevertheless, to devote its fullest attention to the items which will be allocated to this Committee, and in particular to the questions relating to the status of United Nations personnel. Fortunately, the regrettable period of unrest which for some time prevailed in the Secretariat has now ended. I wish to pay tribute, in this connexion, to our eminent Secretary-General for the wisdom and consistency which have marked his policy in this matter.
176.	We cannot overlook, however, that this period has left scars on the body of our Organization. One item of our agenda bears witness to that unhappy past. We shall revert to that matter at a later stage. But 1 should like to state now the conviction of my delegation that the well-being of the United Nations is to a large extent dependent on the existence of a staff of the highest quality, fulfilling its duties under the most favourable conditions, which must include an unquestionable legal safeguarding of their position. The absence of a reason able sense of security would inexorably cause an inadmissible lowering of the high standards that are now being applied. The events which unfortunately took place some years ago are perhaps the reason for the difficulties that have already been encountered in finding a sufficient supply of highly qualified personnel.
177.	I am not unaware of the fact that my slightly pessimistic appraisal of the present situation is based on rather vague indications. I have wished to draw your attention to this situation here and now because, if more indications of this kind should become manifest, we would find ourselves in a very embarrassing situation. I shall not say more on this subject.
178.	A heavy task awaits us in the weeks and months ahead. Formidable is the pile of problems that confronts us. Ours is a heavy responsibility, but we also have a wonderful opportunity for co-operation in the interests of the whole world, which are ultimately the interests of each one of us too. The Netherlands delegation intends to take its full share in the discussions of the Assembly and will contribute its faith in the principles of the Charter and its goodwill towards all mankind in in order to ensure, under God’s indispensable guidance, the success of this tenth session.