53.	On behalf of the Republic of Panama, of whose delegation I have the honour to be Chairman, I bring you a message of hope, optimism and renewed faith in this great international Organization, the United Nations, and at the same-time express my most sincere wishes for the success of the work that we are about to undertake at this tenth Session.
54.	Before continuing my statement, I should like to take the opportunity to express, from this lofty forum of international thought, the most sincere wishes of the Government and people of Panama for the speedy and complete recovery of Mr. Eisenhower, the President of the United States of America, who, for the good of mankind, guides the destiny of the great American people, whose country is providing us with all the necessary facilities to conduct these important meetings of the tenth session of the General Assembly.
55.	It is a matter of satisfaction to me to be able to say that ever since the day when, by the happy inspiration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, that great United States statesman and a great friend of the people and the Republic of Panama, the steps were taken that culminated in the establishment of this Organization, my country, which is proud of its devotion to civil liberties and its respect for human rights, has felt itself identified with the great work of recovery and peace that has had to be undertaken, and has consequently given that work its constant and most enthusiastic support.
56.	The tenth anniversary of the signing of the Charter has just been commemorated, and I believe that we are justified in feeling very pleased with the work our Organization has accomplished during this period, despite the trials and difficulties it has encountered, despite the extraordinarily vast and complex problems with which it has had to deal, such as those caused by the cold war, aggression, political revolutions in various parts of the world, disputes concerning the liberation of colonial countries and extensive changes in the political, social and economic life of the nations.
57.	The United Nations has proved to the world, by the work it has accomplished since its establishment, that it is without any doubt the best instrument for preventing war and maintaining international peace. Its action in this respect has not been merely political, but has extended to other fields, in that it has endeavoured to raise the standards of living of peoples and thereby prepare them for self-government, so that they in turn may contribute to the achievement of the purposes of the United Nations.
58.	In addition to taking a firm stand against aggression, as in the case of Korea, and ‘adopting measures designed to further collective security, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the effective protection of human rights, the United Nations has helped, through its various agencies, to solve the social and economic problems of needy and under-developed nations, and in this respect it may well be said that its work has been and continues to be. of real benefit to millions of people, even in the farthest corners of the world.
59.	The activities of the United Nations in this field are invaluable and illustrate the wisdom and deep foresight of its founders, who obviously realized how unrealistic it would be to expect harmony and peace to reign among nations if they were beset by poverty, hunger, disease, superstition and ignorance. Although this work of the United Nations lacks the spectacular character of its political activities and does not attract the same publicity in the Press, it is nevertheless of definite and great benefit to peoples, since it prepares them to be useful citizens, and to enjoy freedom and progress. It is consequently the most valuable contribution that can be made to the cause of peace and goodwill among nations.
60.	The Republic of Panama, as a democratic and peace-loving State, respectful of human dignity, has always been guided in its international relations by the concepts of justice and coexistence proclaimed in the United Nations Charter. The most eloquent proof of our whole-hearted support of these noble purposes and principles is undoubtedly to be found in the cordial relations and the bonds of sincere friendship which link us not only with our fellow nations of America but also with all the countries of the world.
61.	I consider it a very good augury that, as a result of the spirit of friendship and understanding which has prevailed at recent international conferences, particularly at Geneva, this session of the General Assembly can take place in a propitious atmosphere, so that the work we are embarking on here may bring positive benefits to all the peoples we represent. Although we have not yet succeeded in bringing about the material disarmament which we all desire, it is a fact that of late a conciliatory spirit has made its appearance in the world which is the first essential for a stable peace. The atmosphere is less charged with distrust and suspicion. We are waking from a nightmare and we feel more optimistic. The prevailing spirit is one of goodwill and greater understanding.
62.	Many are the thorny problems we shall have to tackle at this session. In the opinion of my country, the most outstanding ones are disarmament and the control of atomic weapons, the peaceful uses of atomic energy, the admission of new Members to the United Nations, so that the Organization may acquire a universal character and, lastly, the appointment of a committee to study, with due care and thoroughness, the changes and amendments which are required in the Charter if it is to meet present-day requirements more effectively. It is by meeting these problems firmly and resolutely that we shall best be able to strengthen the United Nations, to increase the hopes which we have all placed in it and to heighten its' prestige and authority in the eyes of the world.
63.	The Republic of Panama maintains its faith in the United Nations and in its high purposes. It supports the efforts to achieve greater understanding and international co-operation which the United Nations, by its direct action, has made in the political, social and economic fields, for it considers that it is here, in fields which show immediate results, that the United Nations in its ten years of existence has accomplished — and is still accomplishing — beneficent work of world-wide importance which cannot be ignored.
64.	Like all human institutions, the United Nations has a life and vitality of its own. This is a result of the various reactions which of necessity have an influence upon it, of the normal course of its activities and of the many varied goals which it has set itself. It is natural that the work of the United Nations should at times appear to critics limited. It should be borne in mind, however, that the Organization is endeavouring to solve extremely complicated problems, some of which are almost as old as humanity. It is for this reason that we should not underestimate the paramount importance of the international public opinion which the United Nations is forming at the present time through its exhaustive public discussions of the most difficult world problems, which hitherto were examined only behind closed doors. This public opinion is unquestionably an effective bulwark against the use of force in the settlement of disputes between States. This world public opinion to which I refer, duly inspired and ever alert, must in the course of time become so great and so irresistible a moral force that no country in the world will dare disregard it.
65.	The Panamanian delegation reaffirms its resolute intention of co-operating whole-heartedly and enthusiastically in the accomplishment of the tasks before the United Nations General Assembly! My country Considers, as it has done in the past and will do in future, that we, the Members of the United Nations, are in duty bound to maintain our faith and confidence in the Organization, "supporting and contributing to its efforts to achieve peaceful coexistence among nations, so that international relations may be based on the noble concepts of the Charter, thus ensuring peace, justice and freedom for all the peoples of the world.