50.	Before beginning my statement, I would like to convey to the United States delegation our deep distress on hearing of the illness of Mr. Eisenhower, the President of the United States, and our sincerest hopes for his prompt recovery.
51.	This year, the United Nations enters upon its second decade of life. The ten years which have elapsed since the end of the Second World War have been a period of unceasing effort by the peoples on behalf of peace, against a new war and the new and still more horrible suffering which such a war would mean for mankind.
52.	The beginning of the United Nations second decade coincides with the beginning of a new period in the international situation. The diminution in tension which had been noticeable for some time has now become more marked, and in a number of fields this common tendency to settle international problems by peaceful negotiation has prevailed. This is a creative and constructive trend in line with the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter.
53.	The contribution of the United Nations to these changes has not always been the same. Our Organization’s first ten years of life have unfortunately been marked by many failures and difficulties. Sometimes those difficulties have reached such a pitch that some statesmen were ready to write the Charter off as useless and were predicting the speedy end of the Organization. The country which I have the honour to represent has never shared this point of view. On the contrary, together with some other countries, Poland has always proclaimed that all Member States should make a common constructive effort to maintain the prestige of the United Nations so that it could play the part assigned to it in the Charter.
54.	Despite the difficulties which I have just recalled, the United Nations has survived. This clearly proves that the principles on which it was founded were just, that they coincided with the basic necessities of the state of international relations at the time, and with the need to maintain and develop co-operation among the nations.
55.	Since the first days of its existence, the People’s Republic of Poland has based its foreign policy on the principles on which the United Nations was founded, and it has always bent its efforts in the international sphere towards strengthening the Organization.
56.	The new situation, marked by decreasing tension, has not come about suddenly or by chance. It is the result of long joint effort by all the forces hostile to war and devoted to the maintenance of peace. The important contribution of the socialist States to these changes cannot be denied.
57.	As many speakers before me have emphasized, the meeting of the Heads of Government of the four Powers at Geneva opened up new and far-reaching prospects of considerable scope for a lessening of tension and for closer co-operation. Certain broad lines for international co-operation in the present phase were traced at Geneva. It was recognized there that international relations must be marked by a spirit of understanding, instead of some countries imposing decisions on other countries. It was recognized that the task of all States, and of the great Powers in particular, was to prevent another war, with the mass slaughters that would be incomparably greater even than in previous wars.
58.	That was why the Geneva Conference was welcomed with such relief by millions of men throughout the world who had been awaiting and had demanded such a meeting. Nevertheless, the outcome of the Geneva Conference is only a beginning, for the progress made in decreasing international tension does not mean that peace is already assured. In various parts of the world problems remain unsettled. The atmosphere which has been called the “Geneva spirit” can help to solve these problems, in accordance with the interests of all parties and with the requirements of world peace.
59.	We have to put the idea of the peaceful coexistence of countries with different political and social systems into practice. Coexistence, as we see it, is not a mere passive acceptance of the fact that States with different systems live side by side. A lasting peace can be secured only by constructive co-operation in the political, economic and cultural fields, and in many others.
60.	The idea of the coexistence of States with different systems is gradually gaining ground. There was a time when, in certain circles, the very word “coexistence” was suspect. Now it is a stock word in international relations. The Geneva Conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy was imbued with the idea of peaceful coexistence. It is significant that the Inter-Parliamentary Union, an organization in which many and diverse ideological and political trends are represented, should have adapted unanimously a resolution proclaiming the necessity and validity of the idea of peaceful coexistence. The resolutions of the last conference of the World Federation of United Nations Associations at Bangkok were marked by the same spirit.
61.	Nevertheless, it must be recognized that there are still forces unfavourable and even hostile to the idea of coexistence. They are destructive and backward forces governed by blind and narrow selfishness. All men of goodwill who have the peaceful development of all nations at heart must help in combating, weakening and isolating these forces.
62.	Naturally we realize that time and much constructive effort will be needed to put coexistence into practice and to sweep away the inheritance of the cold war. The creation of an atmosphere of confidence will facilitate the adoption of specific measures for the settlement of disputes. There is a close link between the creation of such an atmosphere and the settlement of international disputes.
63.	That is why constant reference to the so-called problem of the Eastern European countries in no way helps to create an atmosphere of relaxation and confidence. It is unfortunate that a sense of realism did not put the United States representative on his guard against some of his utterances here [518th meeting], utterances without any foundation in fact and at the same time hardly conducive to mutual understanding, AS far as the countries of Eastern Europe are concerned, the days are over and done with when certain forces in international politics could treat them as mere pawns on the political chess-board. Nowadays, Poland and the other peoples’ democracies enjoy complete sovereignly, that is to say, economic as well as political sovereignty. That is why there can be no question of interference in their domestic affairs on any pretext whatever.
64.	The representative of Australia spoke at some length about coexistence [520th meeting], However, his words sorted ill with his remarks on and his compassion, for the Eastern European nations m their alleged isolation. I would suggest that the Australian representative, should count the number of works by classical Western authors, contemporary authors and political writers translated in Poland, and the number of columns in the Polish Press reproducing the statements of Western statesmen and news reports from Western agencies. The result then might be compared with the space given by the Australian Press and publishing industry to the reproduction and translation of accurate news of life in Poland. The Australian representative might then perhaps change his opinion on that point.
65.	If there is to be an atmosphere of confidence, all peoples must be given a feeling of security and their peaceful labours must be safeguarded. The history of contemporary international relations shows us that the organization of collective security is the best known system for the defence of peace. Moreover, the principle of collective security was at the basis of the United Nations Charter.
66.	The experience of the last decades has shown the fundamental importance in world peace of the system of collective security in Europe. The absence of such a system means the maintenance in Europe of conditions conducive to the activities of forces which are hostile to international co-operation. First and foremost among these have been the forces of German militarism and revenge, which have so sorely affected the peoples of Poland, France, Belgium and other European countries in the course of history.
67.	The conclusion of a European treaty of collective security would open the way to a settlement of the German problem by the unification of Germany in a single, democratic and peaceful State. Pending that, the two parts of Germany — the German Democratic Republic and the German Federal Republic — could co-operate within a European system of collective security. The absence of such a system and the ratification of the Paris Agreements providing for the re-militarization of Western Germany were bound to lead to an act of self-defence on the part of the countries threatened. This was the Warsaw Treaty, which will cease to be in force as soon as a system of collective security is set up in Europe.
68.	The need for regional collective security pacts is not confined to Europe. It is coming to be felt in other parts of the world too. A collective security pact in the Far East, mooted by the People’s Republic of China, would help to settle important problems in Asia.
69.	The proceedings and the unanimous resolutions of the Bandung Conference of 29 Asian and African States are further proof of the fact that such co-operation on behalf of peace and security is possible. This Conference was a historic event in the life of the peoples of these continents, peoples who, a relatively short time ago, were still under the colonial yoke and were the objects rather than the subjects of international relations.
70.	Bandung was a demonstration of the will of the peoples of Asia and Africa to join in the struggle against colonialism, against the threat of atomic warfare and against the military groups, which can drag their continents into the chaos of another war. The principle of peaceful coexistence found powerful confirmation at Bandung. The Conference breathed new strength into the peoples of Asia and Africa in their fight to determine their own lives.
71.	In taking the initiative, with the Government of Indonesia and other Governments, in convening the Bandung Conference, the Government of India, which has played an important part in many complicated international problems, rendered great service to the cause of world peace.
72.	Nevertheless, the creation of regional systems of collective security can never replace a system of collective security covering the whole world. These regional systems are, as it were, the pillars on which a general system should rest, and it is the United Nations which should put such a system into effect.
73.	The present situation is particularly favourable to the United Nations. The settlement of a number of disputes, the conclusion of a State Treaty with Austria, the normalization of the relations between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany, the conversations at Geneva between representatives of the People’s Republic of China and of the United States, are so many factors enabling the United Nations to play a more active part in the present international situation.
74.	The United Nations is faced today with a task of paramount importance: it must encourage the trend started by the Geneva Conference in the development of international relations, help to bring about an atmosphere of mutual confidence and make the hopes which mankind has placed in the work of our Organization come true.
75.	However, it is not easy to speak of fruitful work by the United Nations as long as one of the great Powers, with its 600 million inhabitants, is unrepresented. The Polish delegation considers that if the United Nations is to act effectively, and if we want to facilitate the settlement of a number of problems on our agenda, China must be allowed to assume its rightful place in the United Nations.
76.	One of the essential problems on the agenda of this session is undoubtedly that of disarmament and the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction, which is of such basic concern to mankind. This question has had a long and difficult history in the United Nations. Nevertheless, some progress was made at the ninth session, and since then, as a result of the Geneva Conference, the situation has further improved thanks to the greater mutual understanding which, has been achieved and to the fact that the parties have made an effort to find an area of agreement.
77.	A paramount role has been played in this field by the proposals put forward by the Soviet Union on 10 May and again on 21 July 1955 [A/2979], which take into account the principle of the proposals submitted by France and the United Kingdom [DC/71, annexes 9 and 13], on ceilings for armed forces in the various countries, on the progressive reduction of armaments and the prohibition of atomic weapons, and on the establishment of an effective system of inspection which would prevent a surprise attack on any State from any quarter. The Polish delegation believes that these realistic proposals of the Soviet Union, marked by a desire to achieve mutually acceptable decisions, and the proposals Made at Geneva by the other Powers and now being  discussed in the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission, are creating a favourable basis for the understanding which the peoples long for, always provided that all the parties show a constructive spirit and a will to transform words into deeds, and that in these discussions the key problem of effective measures of disarmament is not ignored,
78.	In the circumstances, the importance of the decisions taken recently by certain Governments to reduce their armed forces cannot be overestimated. Among them, the Polish Government has decided to reduce the armed forces of the People’s Republic of Poland by 47,000 men, thereby setting an example of active cooperation in solving the problem of disarmament. We hope that others will follow this example, so that the armaments now burdening mankind may be gradually reduced, even before the formal decisions are taken, and that the vast sums now spent on armaments can be used for raising standards of living and improving living conditions for millions of human beings.
79.	We can already note, too, the first steps towards the peaceful use of atomic energy. The International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy held in Geneva showed the bright prospects which will open before mankind if scientists throughout the world combine their efforts to make the atom serve progress instead of destruction, so that the standards of living and of education of the masses can be raised. This scientific conference marked the starting point of a new kind of competition, of a noble and constructive rivalry, so different from the destructive armaments race.
80.	The relaxation in tension which began at Geneva should favourably affect international economic relations; it has in fact already done so to some extent. Through the Economic and Social Council and its organs, the United Nations can do very useful work in this field. We must intensify the activities of the regional economic commissions and stimulate co-operation between the various regions. All artificial barriers to international trade must be abolished.
81.	In connexion with economic questions, the problem of the development of the economically under-developed countries cannot be left out. The attitude of Poland towards the justifiable aspirations of those countries which wish to strengthen their economies and make them independent, is one of sympathy and understanding. Despite the adoption in this connexion of a number of equitable decisions, among which was a resolution sponsored by Poland at the sixth session of the General Assembly on long-term commercial agreements between the industrialized countries and the economically underdeveloped countries [resolution 523 ( VI)], the question has not yet reached the stage of practical achievement. The technical assistance programme, in which Poland participates, is useful, but does not cover the entire problem of a broad programme of economic development. In our view, the idea of establishing an international economic development fund is worthy of support. However, the creation of such a fund is not enough in itself to stimulate economic development in the under-developed countries. These conditions can best be created by economic co-operation based on equality and reciprocal advantage, consonant with the needs and potentialities of those countries.
82.	A great deal can be done in the field of cultural co-operation, which is an important means of creating understanding among peoples and of removing all the “curtains” created during the cold war by the forces interested in maintaining international tension. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization will have a wide field of action if it is to bring the cultures of the various countries together so that they can enrich one another and each make their greatest possible contribution to the cultural wealth of humanity.
83.	The United Nations should take energetic steps to put an end to war propaganda and propaganda poisoning international relations, and to promote the use of modern methods of information and the opportunities they afford for spreading accurate information about countries, stimulating respect for culture and spreading friendship among the peoples. Contacts between^ worldwide social, trade union and professional organizations with differing outlooks should be promoted. We must also put an end to the attempts which are being made to use refugees who, as a result of the war, found themselves far from their countries and families, in the struggle against their countries. They must be given the opportunity of returning to their own countries as soon as possible. Visits by tourists should also prove most useful in bringing peoples closer together.
84.	These are the fields in which the United Nations can play a great and constructive part. The bringing together of nations and men, inspired by a faith in mankind and in the future of our civilization, is undoubtedly a most effective method of securing peace.
85.	The United Nations can and must carry out all these tasks within the framework of the Charter, which is the essential guide to its work. Under the Charter, the tenth anniversary of which we have just celebrated at San Francisco, we can accomplish a great deal. It is absolutely useless — as experience has shown — to say that because some of the tasks incumbent on the United Nations have not been carried out, responsibility lies with the Charter or with one or other of its provisions. The root of the evil does not lie in the provisions of the Charter or in the differences between the pre-atomic and the atomic age. As the representative of Egypt very rightly pointed out here [518th meeting], the key to success for the United Nations will lie not in amendments to the articles of the Charter, but in their application. A number of other representatives have also opposed the revision of the Charter. The activities initiated some years ago on behalf of such revision were the product of the cold war. We think it is time to banish this myth of the cold war and to create the necessary conditions for the implementation of the Charter, to the greater good of the peoples of the earth.
86.	During the ten years which have elapsed since the end of the war, Poland has striven actively for the creation of conditions favourable to co-operation between all nations. All who know the loss and destruction suffered by my country during the last war will realize the earnestness and the sincerity of the Polish people in supporting all efforts to reduce international tension. We welcomed those efforts and we support them now because our Government’s basic concern is to co-operate in the creation of conditions favourable to international security which will enable the Polish people to continue to exert their peaceful and creative efforts in tranquillity, to go on building new towns, new factories, schools, hospitals and cultural centres.
87.	We are bound to many States by defensive treaties of friendship. None of our frontiers is in dispute. For the first time in history, our relations with all our neighbours are friendly. Poland, which has settled its relations with the German Democratic Republic in a spirit of friendship and mutual understanding, wants to establish cordial relations with all the German people. As there are at present two German States, we declare ourselves in favour of establishing peaceful, normal relations with the Federal Republic of Germany. Poland is a consistent defender of coexistence. It wants normal relations with all States.
88.	Poland is contributing to the cause of peace and security in Asia by participating in the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, in Korea and in the international supervisory commissions in Indochina. Often under difficult conditions, particularly in South Korea, where the authorities are instigating acts hostile to peace tending to render the Commission's work impossible, the Polish representatives spare no effort to carry out their duty. We do so because we consider that peace is indivisible.
89.	Poland believes that in the commissions in Indochina its essential duty is to see that the parties carry out and respect all the armistice conditions. We hope that in Viet-Nam also, despite present difficulties and the attempts of certain elements in southern Viet-Nam to go back on their obligations under the armistice agreements, all the States concerned, particularly the great Powers, will seek to promote consultation between the two parties and to see to it that the elections take place within the prescribed period.
90.	Our political and economic relations with the Asian countries are expanding daily. An important event in this field was the recent visit of the Prime Minister of the great country of India, Mr. Nehru, to Warsaw, and the declaration signed on that occasion by the Prime Ministers of India and Poland. In that declaration, Poland reaffirmed its support for the five principles of coexistence, thus demonstrating once more its fidelity to the idea of international co-operation between States with different systems.
91.	Within the United Nations, we have always defended and will continue to defend the principles of the Charter. We declare ourselves, in all sincerity and with complete consistency, in favour of peaceful international co-operation. We gave constant proof of this even at the acutest stage of me cold war.
92.	Turning now to the present period, let me recall that during the past year, we have welcomed a number of delegations from various countries, statesmen, members of Parliament and economists, including members of the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States. Recently, there was a friendly exchange of visits between Polish and British warships. Poland and France exchange companies of actors. Musicians came to Poland from all over the world to take part in the Chopin competition. Last August, 30,000 young people from 114 countries took part in the fifth world festival of students and young people at Warsaw. Recently, industrialists and journalists from various countries visited the International Fair at Poznan. We have growing commercial relations with all countries, some of them many thousands of miles away from Poland, like the countries in Latin America or in the Far East. These are examples showing that Poland is doing its share to promote peaceful coexistence.
93.	We come to the tenth session of the General Assembly with the deep conviction- that the problems facing the Organization can be solved. Despite their complexity and despite the considerable difficulties they present to the Organization, we believe that there is no international problem which cannot be solved with goodwill on the part of all concerned. The task of settling the problems submitted to the United Nations lies with us. We can succeed if all Member States respect each other’s views, if they do not interfere in the domestic affairs of other countries, and if they recognize the fundamental principle of respect for the equal rights and sovereignty of all States, large and small.
94.	The draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union on measures for the further relaxation of international tension and the development of international co-operation [A/2981] calls upon all States to continue their joint efforts to consolidate universal peace and security. The Polish delegation warmly supports this draft resolution and urges all Member States to adopt it. The peoples want us to work together for peace. We must not disappoint their hopes.
