102.	Following its custom, the General Assembly is beginning its work with an appraisal of the international situation and a review of the tasks which stand before it. That being so, the Soviet Union delegation would like to state its views; and, in doing so, it' will proceed from the thesis that the primary task of the United Nations, in conformity with the Organization’s fundamental principles and purposes, is the strengthening of peace and international security.
103.	There can be no doubt that the first desire of all peoples is to live in peace and tranquillity, so that they can devote their efforts to peaceful and constructive work and to raising their standards of living. This was the desire that was the basis of the United Nations, when the Organization was set up ten years ago. And it is this same desire which still determines the deepest currents in international life.
104.	Recent events have made it clear that the international situation has undergone changes making for a relaxation of tension in international relations. These events have confirmed the fact that the solution of the problem of ensuring the security of individual States, and of international security m general, must be sought not in military groupings of States and the continuation of the "cold war”, but rather in concerted efforts by all States, large and small, to strengthen universal peace. The importance of such efforts must be plain to everyone) particularly in view of the fact that as a result of the Second World War and the great social and political changes that it brought about, a number of States of a socialist type have emerged in Europe and Asia, so that the problem of the peaceful coexistence of States with different economic and social structures has now acquired even graver significance. The first thing to be stressed in this connexion is the importance of efforts in this direction by the great Powers, which possess the most powerful military and material resources and bear a- special responsibility for the destinies of the world.
105.	The most important international event of recent times has been the Geneva Conference of the Heads of Government of the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France, which has exerted a profound influence on the international situation. For the first time since 1945, the Heads of Government of the four Powers established personal contact and exchanged views on a number of the most important and urgent international problems. This fact alone is highly significant in view of the kind of relations that had developed between the four Powers over the last decade. The significance of the Geneva Conference lies in the fact that the leading statesmen attending it clearly expressed their Governments’ desire to make every effort to free the peoples of the world from the fear of a new war.
106.	In this connexion, Mr. Bulganin, the Head of the Soviet Government, stressed the Soviet Union’s inflexible desire for the strengthening of peace among nations. The Soviet Government, he declared, had always advocated the peaceful coexistence of States irrespective of their internal regimes, the social and economic structure of any State being an internal matter to be decided by the people of that State.
107.	Mr. Eisenhower, the President of the United States, to whose statements great importance was attached, spoke similarly of the need for creating an atmosphere of mutual respect and confidence in international relations. Referring to the relations between the Soviet Union and the United States, he pointed out that historically the peoples of the two countries had always lived in peace, that there were no territorial disputes or trade rivalries between them and that the American people wanted to be friends with the Soviet people.
108.	Sir Anthony Eden, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, whose political experience we all value, speaking for the United Kingdom Government emphasized the need for developing international cooperation in the interests of lasting peace.
109.	On behalf of the French Government, Mr. Faure, the Prime Minister of France, also stressed the need for developing peaceful co-operation between States, with a view to ending the "cold war”.
110.	As may be seen from these statements, the leading statesmen of the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom and France who met in Geneva realized that a new approach to the settlement of outstanding international issues, including problems pending in Europe and Asia, was essential. There is an obvious difference between the tenor and general spirit of the Geneva Conference and the statements that were being made in the not-too-distant past in favour of continuing the “cold war”. The speeches of the Heads of Government in favour of peace aroused new hopes among the peoples of the world, and expectations that they would not remain idle words.
111.	The peoples of the world welcomed the Geneva Conference with such enthusiasm precisely because it marked a definite reversal in the trend of the relations between the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France, a reversal which has had its influence on the international situation as a whole. The trend now is to seek means of overcoming existing difficulties and reaching the necessary agreement on outstanding international problems through negotiations conducted in a spirit of mutual understanding and international co-operation. Manifestly, the Conference already reflected to some extent the wide-spread desire for the consideration of urgent international issues from the angle of building up international confidence and consolidating international peace rather than that of strengthening particular groupings.
112.	As you know, the Conference did not indeed, it could not  —  achieve any immediate solution of the problems on which the Heads of Government exchanged views. The solution of these problems will require time, determination and patience; those who took part in the Conference had no illusions on this score. Nevertheless, thanks to the efforts they all made at Geneva, agreed directives to the Foreign Ministers of the four Powers on a number of important questions were worked out. The Ministers are to continue the work begun by the Heads of Government and to continue the effort to settle outstanding international issues on the basis of the directives referred to.
113.	The Geneva Conference was not a matter of chance. The way for it had been paved by a number of recent events. It became possible because the forces of peace and social progress had gained strength. The Conference held at Geneva reflected the deep changes that have taken place in the minds of the peoples, who are displaying increasing determination to defend peace, to refuse to allow the world to be consumed once again in the conflagration of war, with all its attendant sufferings for millions upon millions of people. No one can fail today to realize that the popular movement for peace that has developed in recent years has become a potent factor for universal peace.
114.	The people’s unflinching will for peace found expression in the fact that, even before the Geneva Conference, important events had occurred which helped to ease international tension and to clear the international climate. Such events as the armistice in Korea and the termination of hostilities in Indo-China, with the recognition of the Indochinese people’s right to self-determination, were a sufficiently clear indication of that trend. While that does not mean that no acute international problems remain to be settled, the de facto restoration of peace throughout the world — a situation which might be said to have existed since the end of the war in Indo-China — had prepared the ground for the Geneva Conference of Heads of Government.
115.	An important factor in the improvement of the international situation was the settlement, to the satisfaction of the parties concerned, of the highly important issue of Austria. This settlement meets both the national interests of the Austrian people and the interests of European security. As a result of this settlement, Austria has become an autonomous and independent State, without being drawn into any military groupings of other States. It has undertaken to pursue a policy of permanent neutrality; consequently it cannot now be used by other Powers as an instrument of their policy. As you know, the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France have agreed to respect Austrian neutrality. This settlement of the Austrian problem is a substantial contribution to peace in Europe.
116.	Austria’s decision to follow a neutral course is significant in the present international situation. The trend towards neutrality has recently been gaining ground steadily in a number of other countries, whose peoples are expressing themselves with growing insistence and determination in favour of a policy of nonparticipation in aggressive military blocs and coalitions. In view of this, the Soviet Union has already announced its willingness to respect the neutrality of such countries. It is to be hoped that other Powers will show a similar understanding for this policy of neutrality, which helps to strengthen the peace.
117.	Another important factor making for the reduction of tension was the change in the relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia which resulted from the visit of a Soviet Government delegation to Yugoslavia last spring. The restoration of normal relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia not only meets the interests and wishes of both peoples, but serves to promote the cause of peace in Europe; it is a major contribution to the improvement of the, European situation as a whole and to the strengthening of confidence between States. At the same time, the successful development of friendly relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia which is now taking place serves the interests of international security.
118.	Mention need not be made here of the other important international events which have helped to ease tension. The positive part that has been played in these developments by the peaceful policy of the Soviet Union and certain other States is well known.
119.	Since the Second World War, profound changes have taken place not only in Europe, but also in Asia. Important developments are also occurring in Africa.
120.	First and foremost, no one should underestimate the importance of the formation of the great People’s Republic of China, created as a result of the Chinese people’s final victory in their age-old struggle for national independence and freedom. The emergence of a new, popular and democratic China, whose legitimate rights and interests as a great sovereign State we must all respect, is one of the most important historical events of recent times. The rise and consolidation of the People’s Republic of China, which enjoys the unwavering support of the great Chinese people, is a powerful factor for peace not only in Asia and the Far East, but also throughout the world.
121.	Japan also can and must play, along with other countries, an important part in the maintenance of peace and the strengthening of security in the Far East. The successful conclusion of the negotiations now under Way in London between the Soviet Union and Japan on the restoration of normal relations between the two countries would undoubtedly serve the interests of both the Japanese and Soviet peoples and help to improve the situation in the Far East.
122.	Since the Second World War, a number of countries in Asia and Africa have won their independence. They include India, Indonesia, Burma, Pakistan, Ceylon, Nepal, the Philippines, Lebanon, Syria, Israel, Jordan, Libya and others. Some of these States are already prominent in the struggle for peace. Special reference should be made in this connexion to the part which is being played by India, the second largest Country in Asia. The great Indian people has set an example not Only of courageous struggle for independence but also of co-operation with other nations in the cause of peace. All of us, I think, must wish every success to the peoples of Asia and Africa and the countries of the Near and Middle East who have taken the road of independent development and are steadfastly and courageously defending their national independence. It is the duty of the United Nations to give every support to the peoples of these countries, to safeguard their legitimate rights, to put an end to any attempts to draw them into military groupings of Powers pursuing their own narrow ends, and to prevent any foreign interference in their domestic affairs.
123.	The Soviet Union always has been and remains a consistent champion of peace and progress. Peoples defending their national independence, their freedom and the cause of peace among nations will always meet with its whole-hearted and active sympathy.
124.	In the last few years, as we all know, a growing desire has been manifested for the expansion of trade and other economic relations and the removal of the discrimination now obtaining in East-West trade. Political, scientific, business and social contacts between the various countries have been extended. Visits by statesmen, exchanges of parliamentary delegations, exchanges of information on scientific, industrial and agricultural advances, the development of international tourism and exchanges of visits by leading personalities in the worlds of art, sport and so on, are all significant manifestations of the efforts that are being made on all sides to build up contacts and develop mutual understanding among nations. It is noteworthy that such delegations are being given a warm and friendly welcome by the peoples of the Soviet Union, the United States, China, the United Kingdom, Poland, Egypt, Sweden, Austria and other countries. The Soviet people see in this the expression of these peoples’ ardent desire for the establishment of friendly relations among States and the consolidation of peace.
125.	I should like to refer to the constructive part played by the well known declaration of 9 February 1955 of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, calling for the establishment of direct contacts between parliaments through the exchange of parliamentary delegations, in accordance with the peoples’ deep desire for peaceful cooperation. We are glad to note that the Soviet Parliament’s appeal has met with wide response, as may be seen from the fact that parliamentary delegations from many countries have visited the Soviet Union this year. Such meetings between members of parliament from various countries will in their turn promote the development of the East-West contacts called for by the Geneva Conference. The February declaration by the Supreme Soviet of the USSR is an appeal by the Soviet Parliament to all the parliaments of the world. It is addressed not only to those countries with which the USSR maintains diplomatic relations, but to other States as well. In certain cases, the establishment of parliamentary contacts may well also create more favourable conditions for the desired normalization of relations between States.	
126.	Not so long ago, all work connected with the use of atomic energy was shrouded in mystery in many countries. This was yet another sign of the mistrust prevailing in international relations. It is proper to say that the situation has now changed considerably, as evidenced by the International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy held at Geneva in August 1955. We pay a tribute to the United States Government for initiating the idea of convening that Conference.
127.	As you know, Soviet scientists took a very active part in the work of the Conference: they submitted over 100 papers describing the Soviet Union’s experience in the use of atomic energy in technology, biology, medicine and agriculture. Soviet scientists also presented a report on the functioning of the world’s first atomic power station, constructed in the USSR. Many foreign representatives have had the opportunity to see this power station for themselves.
128.	There can be no doubt that the scientific Conference at Geneva did much to advance international cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Soviet Union, for its part, intends to co-operate still further with other countries with a view to developing the peaceful uses of atomic energy. We also hope that the beginnings made at the Conference will be followed up by the calling of regular — if possible annual — conferences of a similar kind, attended by scientists from over the world, and not atomic scientists only but also specialists in other fields of technology and science,
129.	Thus a number of recent developments, the most significant of which was the Geneva Conference of the Heads of Government, have reflected the far-reaching changes that are taking place in the international situation. This does not mean that difficulties are a thing of the past. We shall still have to overcome many prejudices and many barriers on the road ahead. For example, the term “satellites” is still in use. But those who seek to apply this term to the peoples of Eastern Europe are simply transferring their own familiar ideas to countries to which they are entirely inapplicable. These countries have proved by their deeds that their relations with other States can develop properly only on a basis of respect for the principles of national sovereignty and friendship among nations.
130.	We must strive unremittingly to create conditions in which people can look with confidence toward the future. The success of further efforts in the struggle for peace will depend on the extent to which opportunities are seized and to which attention is directed to settling outstanding international issues rather than creating or strengthening this or that military coalition. On this, too, will depend the measure of success the United Nations is able to achieve in attaining its great purpose — that of providing genuine security for the peoples of the world.
131.	The primary objective in the present circumstances must be recognized to be the termination of the armaments race. As you all know, the armaments race, particularly in recent years, has assumed unprecedented proportions. Stocks of so-called conventional armaments are constantly piling up. So are atomic and hydrogen weapons, which, moreover, are day by day becoming more destructive and dangerous. The military expenditures of States have reached unheard-of heights, and they fall with their full weight on the shoulders of the toiling masses — the workers, peasants, employees and small proprietors. Enormous material and human resources are being diverted to war preparations, instead of being used for constructive purposes, to raise the peoples’ standards of living and to give the necessary assistance to the economically under-developed countries and areas. This state of affairs cannot continue. The United Nations must throw its weight into the scale against the armaments race, in favour of the reduction of armaments, the prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons and the removal of the threat of a new war.
132.	These are the purposes of the proposals on the reduction of armaments, the prohibition of atomic weapons and the elimination of the threat of a new war which the Soviet Government presented to the Subcommittee of the Disarmament Commission on 10 May 1955. The text of the Soviet proposals has been distributed to all members of the General Assembly today [A/2979],
133.	The new Soviet proposals presented to the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission embody a practical programme of measures designed to bring about a relaxation of international tension, build up confidence among nations and end the “cold war”. They refer to the need for putting an end to all war propaganda, in accordance with the resolution adopted by the General Assembly several years ago [resolution 110 (II)]. We should see to it that this resolution is carried out. The Soviet proposals also speak of the need for reaching agreement on the liquidation of foreign military bases on the territory of other States. Failing such an agreement', even one providing only for the step-by- step execution of the requisite measures, there can be no hope of any genuine elimination of mistrust in international relations, The Soviet proposals also provide, quite naturally, for the removal of every form of discrimination impeding the development of international trade, and for the extension of cultural contacts, the exchange of delegations and so on. As you know, the importance of these matters is now generally recognized. The USSR proposals also contain explicit recommendations designed to expedite the settlement of the German problem and of outstanding questions in the Far East.
134. What is important in the Soviet proposals is the fundamental principles they embody, which could well form the basis for an international convention on the reduction of armaments and the prohibition of atomic weapons.
135.	The new Soviet proposals on the reduction of armaments and the prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons are a major advance towards a further reconciliation of the positions of the USSR and the Western Powers on the question of disarmament. It should be pointed out that on a number of important issues the Soviet proposals take into account ideas previously put forward by the Western Powers in the Disarmament Commission.
136.	The Soviet Government has, for instance, accepted the Western Powers’ proposal on the establishment of levels for the armed forces of the five Powers: namely, 1 million to 1,500,000 men each for the Soviet Union, the United States of America and the People’s Republic of China, and 650,000 men each for France and the United Kingdom. Agreement on this question would lead at once to a tremendous reduction in military expenditure, and would be a major step towards ending the armaments race. The Soviet Union’s acceptance of the United Kingdom, French and United States proposal for the establishment of ceilings for the armed forces of the five Powers renders completely invalid the objections previously raised to the prohibition of atomic weapons; objections based on the pretext that atomic weapons make up for the alleged “inferiority” of the Western Powers in conventional weapons and ensure a “balance” in armaments between the West and the East. The USSR proposal on levels of armed forces gives full weight to the Western Powers’ position on this matter and justifies the expectation that they in their turn will adopt a position on the question of atomic weapons which will make it possible for agreement to be reached on that question.
137.	The Soviet Union has also given due weight to the proposal of France and the United Kingdom on the time-table for the implementation of the complete prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons and their elimination from national armaments. Both the USSR and the Franco-British proposals provide that the complete prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons should come into effect after the reduction of conventional armaments and armed forces to the extent of 75 per cent of the total reduction. It is proposed that the elimination of these weapons from the armaments of States and their destruction should be carried out simultaneously with the reduction of conventional armaments and armed forces by the final 25 per cent of the agreed reduction.
138.	The Soviet Union attaches considerable importance to the setting up of controls to ensure the implementation of disarmament measures, and its proposals provide that the control organ should have extensive rights and powers The Soviet proposal for the establishment, on a basis of reciprocity, on the territories of the States concerned, of control posts at railway junctions, on main motor highways, in aerodromes and at large ports, creates the requisite conditions for effective control and would be of particular value in preventing a surprise attack by one State upon another. It is common knowledge that modern warfare necessitates the concentration and deployment of large land, air and naval forces. The proposal for the establishment of control posts under the authority of the international control organ offers the necessary means for detecting any such concentration and for preventing any surprise attack. The establishment of control posts on railways, main motor highways, aerodromes and seaports, with a view to the supervision of any transfer or regrouping of armed forces, would do much to strengthen confidence between States and would thereby help to bring about a relaxation of international tension.
139.	The Soviet proposals of 10 May 1955 have thus paved the way for the solution of the extremely complex problem of international control over the reduction of armaments and the prohibition of atomic weapons. At the same time, the Soviet Government has expressed its willingness to give the most careful. consideration to other proposals on this important question.
140.	In this connexion, reference should be made to President Eisenhower’s well-known proposal at the Geneva Conference concerning the exchange of military information and aerial photographs. The importance of those proposals must be recognized. We regard them as the expression of a sincere desire to advance the solution of the important problem of international control and inspection. It is from the same point of view that we are studying the proposal and its various aspects. The question that interests us, of course, is how far this proposal is calculated to contribute to the reduction of armaments and the settlement of the question of the prohibition of atomic weapons, that is to say, how far it can facilitate the achievement of our basic task, which is to put an end to the armaments race and to reduce the heavy burden on the peoples resulting from swollen military budgets and military preparations of all kinds. It is abundantly clear that the peoples count on the discussion of the disarmament problem to yield results likely to strengthen peace, remove the threat of another war and reduce the financial burden which the armaments race imposes upon them.
141.	In this connexion, the statement made yesterday by the Chairman of the United States delegation cannot be passed over in silence. Mr. Dulles said that the “limitation of armaments becomes virtually unattainable” [518th meeting, para. 74]. Such a statement throws doubt on the usefulness of the work of the Disarmament Commission, which was set up by the General Assembly.
142.	At the Geneva Conference, Mr. Faure, the Prime Minister of France, submitted a proposal for the reduction of military budgets and the establishment, with the resultant savings, of a special fund for the assistance of economically under-developed countries. The Soviet Government is giving due consideration to this proposal. We believe that funds saved through reductions in military budgets could be used both to relieve the tax burden on the peoples of the States concerned and to assist the economically under-developed countries.
143.	Considering that any steps taken by States to end the armaments race and reduce armaments would do much to further the relaxation of international tension and to strengthen confidence between States, the USSR Government decided to reduce the strength of Soviet armed forces by 640,000 men by 15 December 1955. This is not a mere intention or a project, but a practical first step, so far as the Soviet Union is concerned, towards carrying out the task of substantially reducing armaments and armed forces. The Soviet delegation expresses the hope that other Powers possessing large armed forces will in their turn, and as a token of goodwill, take steps to reduce their own armed forces, without waiting for agreement to be reached on an international convention on this subject.
144.	It is also a well-known fact that the existence of military bases on foreign territories is one of the main causes of international tension.
145.	The Soviet Union, for its part, maintained until recently only two military bases outside its own frontiers. One of these bases was situated in the Far East, at Port Arthur, and was jointly administered by the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China. At the end of last year, on the initiative of the Soviet Union, agreement was reached between the USSR and, the People’s Republic of China on the transfer of this jointly held military base to the People’s Republic of China alone. This agreement was put into effect in the spring of 1955. At the present time the Soviet Union has not a single military base in the Far East outside its own territory. The Soviet Union’s second military base was on Finnish territory, in the Porkkala-Udd region. It had been established in accordance with the peace treaty which came into force in 1947 for a period of 50 years. Under an agreement just concluded between the Soviet Union and Finland, in which the initiative again came from the USSR, this Soviet military base too will be liquidated in the very near future. By 1 January 1956, all Soviet military units will have been withdrawn from the Porkkala-Udd area, and the area will return to the full disposal of Finland.
146.	Thus, of two military bases maintained by the Soviet Union outside its frontiers under the relevant agreements, one was given up several months ago, while the second and last will be abandoned this year. The Soviet Union will possess not a single military base on the territory of other States. The Soviet Government took these steps in order to bring about a further improvement in international relations and to strengthen confidence between States. Here again, the Soviet Government has translated words into deeds. Our action justifies us in appealing to the Governments of other States, particularly those which maintain a large number of military bases on foreign territory, to take steps in their turn to abandon them. There can be no doubt that this would best help to arrest the armaments race, to strengthen confidence between States and to end the "cold war”.
147.	Wishing, as it does, to ensure the maintenance of general peace, the Soviet Government has always attached great importance to the achievement of security in Europe. It is a historical fact that the most devastating wars, including the first and second world wars, have begun in Europe. Thus the maintenance of peace in Europe would be of decisive significance for the maintenance of general peace. It is for this reason that the Soviet Government has drawn attention to the need for establishing an effective security system in Europe, and has submitted a proposal to that effect for consideration by the States concerned. This proposal provides for the establishment in Europe, with the participation of the United States of America, of a collective security system based on the joint efforts of all European States, whatever their social and political systems. The Soviet Union is, of course, prepared to examine other proposals having the object of ensuring security in Europe.
148.	In order to facilitate the achievement of the desired agreement on this question, the Soviet Government submitted a proposal at the Geneva Conference under which the establishment of a general European collective security system would be divided into two stages.
149.	During the first stage, the States participating in the general European security system would remain bound by the obligations they had assumed under the treaties and agreements entered into during the period of the formation of military and political groupings. However, they would undertake to refrain from the use of armed force and to settle all disputes arising between them by peaceful means. Clearly, the acceptance of such an obligation by the countries participating in the security system would help to prevent the appearance in Europe of any situation which might constitute a threat to peace.
150.	During the second stage, States would assume in full the obligations resulting from the European collective security system. At the same time, the North Atlantic Treaty and the Paris Agreements, as well as the eight-Power Warsaw Treaty, concluded as an answer to the Paris Agreements, would become null and void. We also proposed that the treaty should provide for the necessary consultation between States participating in the collective security system at any time when, in the opinion of any one of them, there arose a threat of an armed attack in Europe on one or more States parties to the treaty, so that effective steps might be taken to remove the threat. Under this proposal, an armed attack on one or more States parties to the treaty by any State or group of States would be regarded as an attack on all the parties to the treaty.
151.	The reason for the proposal that the establishment of a general European security system should be brought about in two stages, rather than at once, is the existence of the present military groupings in Europe. Its object is to make it easier to surmount the existing obstacles to agreement on the important problem of European security, which is of deep concern to all the nations of Europe — and not to them alone. But the proposal contemplates the consolidation of a general European security system within a definite period of time; and during the second stage of the establishment of the system the present military groupings in Europe would be dissolved and the maintenance of peace and general European security would become the common task of all the nations of Europe.
152.	The Soviet Government gave careful consideration to the ideas expressed by the participants in the Geneva Conference on the question of European security, and in particular to those voiced by Sir Anthony Eden, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, which are at present being examined in the Disarmament Commission. It hopes that its own proposals, together with all constructive ideas expressed by other participants in the Geneva Conference on the question of European security, will provide a basis for solving this important problem in such a way. as to safeguard the vital interests of all European nations.
153.	The attainment of agreement on this question would bring about a fundamental change in the European situation, which during recent years has been steadily deteriorating. A particularly important factor in the deterioration of the European situation has been the conclusion this year of the Paris Agreements, which provide for the remilitarization of Western Germany and its inclusion in the military blocs of certain Western Powers, thereby creating serious obstacles to the reunification of Germany.
154.	The formation of a general European security system would also help to create more favourable conditions for the settlement of the German problem, including the problem of the restoration of German unity. The solution of this latter problem cannot be separated from the establishment of a general European security system, or from the question whether Europe is to become a potential hotbed of war or a bulwark of peace and international security.
155.	On 13 September 1955, as you know, that is, only ten days ago, agreement was reached between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany (Western Germany) establishing normal diplomatic relations. Hereafter, the USSR will maintain diplomatic and other relations not only with the German Democratic Republic, but also with the Federal Republic of Germany. This will be conducive to the establishment of normal relations between States throughout Europe. Thus the establishment of normal relations between the USSR and the Federal Republic of Germany will help to improve still more the relations between the Soviet and German peoples, and will also serve to strengthen peace in Europe. In this connexion, reference must also be made to the new agreements concluded only a few days ago in Moscow between the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic. The object of these agreements is to promote still further the development of close co-operation and the consolidation of friendly relations between the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic on a basis of equality, mutual respect for sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs.
156.	As for the German problem as a whole, it follows from my present remarks that, under present conditions, this will find its solution through the establishment of a general European security system.
157.	The General Assembly cannot fail to consider the situation in Asia and the Far East. Among the various international problems which still await settlement, those relating to Asia and the Far East are especially urgent.
158.	In this connexion, I must first of all emphasize the importance of the Taiwan question. This ancient Chinese territory is still not reunited with the People’s Republic of China, a situation which is a serious obstacle to the normalization of the general situation in the Far East. There is no need for me to dwell at length on the reason for the present situation in the Taiwan area; it is common knowledge. A sober analysis of die situation must inevitably lead to the conclusion that the obstacles preventing the reunification of Taiwan and other Chinese coastal islands with the People’s Republic of China must be removed; and the sooner the better.
159.	I am sure we all recognize the importance of the talks now being held at Geneva, at the initiative of the People’s Republic of China, between that Government and the Government of the United States. Let us hope that these talks will contribute to the establishment of normal relations between the two countries.
160.	The need for an immediate settlement of the question of the restoration of the legitimate rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations has already been emphasized here. We have also heard some unconvincing arguments in opposition. The objections came in particular from those who would like to see China as it was in the past, when certain foreign circles lorded it over the country as they saw fit. But in those days the Chinese people was not master in its own country; it was in a state of servitude. It is time we realized that those days are gone forever — a fact which can bring only rejoicing to all supporters of freedom and national independence.
161.	It is noteworthy that it, was not until the great Chinese people accepted the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party that China freely spread its wings and set out on the broad sunlit way of progress. This, apart from all other considerations, throws a useful light on a problem which has been referred to here, die problem of communism. But if the restoration of the Chinese People’s Republic’s rights; in the United Nations is to continue to be blocked on precisely this ground, then the authority and the vital work of the United Nations will suffer,
162.	Nor should we forget that although the war in Korea has been brought to an end, the Korean problem is still far from settled. This means that the States concerned must spare no effort to bring about a final peaceful settlement of the Korean question. Under present conditions, a most important step towards such a settlement would be the establishment and development of relations between North and South Korea, and a rapprochement between them with a view to achieving agreement at some future date on the reunification of Korea. It should be noted that the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has on a number of occasions submitted definite proposals for the establishment of business and cultural relations between North and South Korea. Unfortunately, the Government of South Korea takes a different view, and makes no attempt to conceal the fact that it is preparing for aggressive action against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It is obvious that this attitude on the part, of the South Korean Government must necessarily constitute a serious obstacle to the settlement of the Korean question, and one" which we cannot overlook.
163.	The question of the Indo-China situation also awaits a final solution. The Geneva agreements on Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia put an end to the hostilities in Indo-China and marked out the road towards a settlement in that area based on the recognition of the legitimate national rights of its peoples and their indisputable right to a free and independent existence. The basic provisions of the Geneva agreements relating to Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia are in general being carried out, though not without delays. Nevertheless, it has to be said mat. by no means everything is being done to ensure the successful solution of the important political problems arising out of these agreements. As you know, the consultations on the organization of general elections in Viet-Nam provided for under the Geneva agreements have not yet begun. The obvious stumbling-block is the attitude of the authorities of southern Viet-Nam, who have avoided carrying out the provisions of the Geneva agreements and still refuse to take part in such consultations.
164.	We are justified in hoping that the necessary steps will be taken to carry out the Geneva agreements on Indo-China, and that no disruption of the consultations between the representatives of the authorities of northern and southern Viet-Nam will be allowed. That is essential if general elections are to be held in Viet-Nam within the prescribed time, thereby opening up the possibility of unifying the country by restoring the national unity of Viet-Nam.
165.	These remarks about the situation in Asia and the Far East do not, of course, exhaust the problems which are a source of concern to the peoples of that area. There are many other important problems connected with the maintenance of peace in that area and the struggle of the peoples concerned for their national independence and security.
166.	These problems were considered at the Bandung Conference, attended by the representatives of 29 Asian and African States, at which a particularly prominent part was played by the People’s Republic of China, India and Indonesia. The Bandung Conference was a major historical event, reflecting the mighty movement which is sweeping along the peoples of the East who are struggling for their national independence, for peace and for freedom. The Conference was attended by representatives of countries with varying political and social systems. Despite the fact that some of the participants in the Conference had already been drawn into various military groupings alien to their national interests, the Bandung Conference reached unanimous decisions of great political importance for the strengthening of world peace and the development of the national liberation movement of the colonial and dependent peoples.
167.	Since India achieved its independence and joined the ranks of the free nations, the significance of the Republic of India as an important factor for the strengthening of peace has been steadily growing. India is playing an important and increasingly active part in questions of great moment to the countries of Asia. In the Soviet delegation’s opinion, the statement made by Mr. Nehru, the Prime Minister of India, on 19 July 1955, regarding the desirability of calling a conference along the lines of the Geneva Conference to discuss the problems of Asia and the Far East, deserves serious consideration. As you know, this proposal of Mr. Nehru’s was supported by U Nu, the Prime Minister of Burma, and several other statesmen of Asian countries.
168.	I must also emphasize the great importance of the statement made by Mr. Chou En-lai, Prime Minister of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, at the recent session of the All-China People’s Congress. In that statement he supported the idea of calling a conference of this kind to examine the problems of Asia and the Far East, and expressed the hope that the countries of Asia and the Pacific area, including the United States, would agree to conclude a collective peace pact in that area. A collective peace pact of this kind would meet the real interests of the peoples of Asia, whereas military blocs such as the South-East Asia Collective Defence Treaty Organization are a direct threat to the security and the national independence of the nations of Asia and the Far East. The settlement of outstanding problems in Asia and the Far East would do much to improve the international situation as a whole.
169.	Under present conditions, the United Nations has a special duty to strive to lessen still further the tension in international relations. It can and should use every available opportunity to promote better mutual understanding and co-operation among States. The Charter of the United Nations begins with the statement that the peoples of the United Nations are “determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind”. The Charter was adopted with due regard for the fact that the United Nations embraced States with different social systems, and that the task of this international Organization would be to encourage cooperation among these States and promote their peaceful coexistence.
170.	The vitality of the principles of progress on which the Charter is founded has been fully demonstrated by the course of events during the past decade. These principles serve the interests of the freedom and independence of nations, as also the cause of strengthening peace and international co-operation. However serious the shortcomings in the practical work of the United Nations may have been, the purposes and principles of the Organization have received the recognition of all peoples striving for peace, freedom and progress.
171.	At this session, the General Assembly has before it the question of a general conference of the Members of the United Nations for the purpose of reviewing the Charter.
172.	In the opinion of the Soviet Union, there are no grounds for a review of the United Nations Charter. The Charter is fully adequate in its present form for the tasks of strengthening universal peace and developing international co-operation in political, economic and other spheres. A review of the Charter with a view to amending its fundamental provisions would not serve to promote confidence in relations between States; on the contrary, it would impede the attainment of this aim.
173.	We all know how difficult and complex a task the drafting of the United Nations Charter was. In this connexion, we should recall the name of Franklin Roosevelt, then President of the United States, who played a prominent part in laying the foundations of the United Nations. In the drafting of the Charter, notably at the San Francisco Conference in 1945, tremendous efforts were required to formulate an instrument adequate to the primary task of maintaining peace among nations and at the same time acceptable to all Member States of the Organization, irrespective of the differences in their political and social systems. If we consider the circumstances objectively, we shall inevitably conclude that agreement on the various Charter provisions which some States believe require amendment would certainly not be easier, and might be more difficult, to attain at present than it was ten years ago. It is not the fault of the Charter that since the establishment of the United Nations the international situation has by no means always developed in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter. Given a sincere desire on the part of the Member States of the United Nations to promote international co-operation and security, the Charter in its present form is fully adequate to meet the demands placed on it.
174.	For these reasons, the Soviet Government does not consider the calling of a general conference for the purpose of reviewing the Charter advisable. Our purpose should be not to demolish the Charter, but to achieve agreed action by States, and in particular by the permanent members of the Security Council; that is essential if the United Nations is really to succeed in its task of maintaining and strengthening peace. The Soviet Government feels it necessary to say plainly that the Security Council should be given a more important role in the United Nations, as the Charter provides; for in recent years, the Council has obviously not been functioning at full capacity, and has on a number of occasions been by-passed in connexion with important matters relating to the maintenance of peace, matters which ought in fact to have been dealt with precisely by the Security Council.
175.	The United Nations must become an organization which not merely does not encourage or turn a blind eye to various attempts to set up opposing military blocs, but actively promotes the development in every sphere of co-operation and contacts between the countries of East and West, and contributes to the genuine consolidation of peace and international security.
176.	The state of affairs with regard to the admission of new Members to the United Nations is absolutely unsatisfactory. A large number of States of Europe, Asia and Africa still remain outside this international Organization and are not taking part in its work, despite the fact that they desire membership and meet the requirements for membership. They are barred from the Organization by the discrimination in respect of certain countries which still stubbornly persists here. An end must be put to this injustice.
177.	The Soviet Union is in favour of an immediate settlement of the question of the admission of new Members. Accordingly, the Soviet delegation declares that it is willing to support the simultaneous admission to the United Nations of the 16 States which have applied for membership. We are convinced that this solution of the problem of the admission of new Members would be in full conformity with the interests of the United Nations. Favourable action on the question of the admission of the 16 new States to the United Nations would not only meet the legitimate demands of the countries concerned but also serve the cause of peace.
178.	We all know that the peoples of the world have welcomed with deep satisfaction the relaxation of international tension which has become apparent. Recent developments —  in particular, the Geneva Conference of Heads of Government and the first conference of African and Asian countries, held at Bandung — have opened up vast possibilities in this direction. It is the plain duty of the United Nations to promote in every way the extension of international co-operation in every field, political and economic, cultural and scientific.
179.	We must not forget that even now voices are still heard calling for the continuation of the “cold war”. Schemes are still being fostered in certain quarters, with selfish interests and aggressive aims, to create and expand military groupings in various parts of the world. These schemers preach a policy of threats and pressure on other States. They oppose by every means at their disposal any reduction in military budgets, military orders and military preparations. They even go so far as to assert that the Geneva Conference and its results were the consequence of this policy. But, as the saying goes, facts are stubborn things, and the facts show that it was neither sabre-rattling nor threats that made the Geneva Conference a success. The success of the Conference reflected the will of the peoples for peace and the desire of all the participants to find a new and more harmonious approach to the solution of those international problems which still await settlement. The characteristic feature of the Geneva Conference was a realization of the need for the solution of urgent international problems, of the need to find ways of settling outstanding problems that would not fan the flames of the “cold war”, but would increase confidence among nations and improve relations between their leading statesmen. And it was this that made positive results possible.
180.	This is the path that we must continue to follow with a view to achieving further successes, both in the forthcoming negotiations between the Powers on outstanding problems and on the questions under consideration by the United Nations, which are of the utmost importance to the cause of peace. Thus alone can we satisfy the hopes of the peoples, who fervently desire a life of peace and tranquillity.
181.	In conclusion, the USSR delegation submits to the General Assembly, for its consideration, the following draft resolution [A/2981] entitled “Measures for the further relaxation of international tension and for the development of international co-operation”: “The General Assembly “Notes with satisfaction the efforts made by States, particularly of late, to relax international tension, to promote mutual confidence and to develop cooperation among nations; in this respect, the Geneva Conference of the Heads of Government of the four Powers, the Bandung Conference of Asian and African countries and the development of contacts between the political leaders of States are of particular importance; “Calls upon Governments to continue their efforts with a view to consolidating universal peace and security and to seek a further improvement of relations and the strengthening of confidence among States; “Attaches particular importance to the consideration of proposals by States designed to put an end to the armaments race and to settle outstanding international problems through negotiations; to the consideration of the proposals of the Soviet Government of 10 May and 21 July 1955 on the reduction of armaments, the prohibition of atomic weapons and the removal of the threat of a new war, the proposal of the United States of America on a general plan for the implementation of the disarmament proposals made by the President of the United States on 21 July 1955 at Geneva, and the proposals introduced at Geneva by the United Kingdom and by France, and of pertinent proposals by other States; “will consider these and other possible proposals, regarding as its principal tasks the removal of the threat of a new war, the achievement of security and confidence in the future and the creation of conditions for a peaceful and tranquil life of peoples throughout the world.”
182.	The delegation of the USSR expresses the hope that this draft resolution will receive the necessary support of the other members of the General Assembly, national security. and that this session as a whole will be a fruitful one, inspired by the desired to improve international co-operation and strengthen universal peace and international security.